INTRODUCTION  THE ORIGIN OF EKADAŚI
The story of the origin of Ekādaśī is told by Vyāsadeva to  Jaimini in the Padma Purāna 7.22.7-52). At the dawn of creation, Lord Nārāyana created all moving and non-moving creatures. Out of all different kinds of sins, He also created Pāpapurusa, the personification of sin, to punish those who do not  abide by the rules of the scriptures. Seeing the horrible appearance of Pāpapurusa, the Lord also created Yama, the god  of death, to control him. Sinful persons will after death go to  Yama, who will send them on to hellish punishment in the hands  of Pāpapurusa.
Some time later, Lord Nārāyana mounted Garuda and flew  down to the abode of Yama. Yama greeted the Lord respectfully and offered Him beautiful prayers. While listening to these  prayers, the Lord could also hear loud, pitiful cries of help from  all directions. When asked, Yama replied that these are the  cries of sinful persons suffering in hell. Riding on Garuda, Lord  Nārāyana immediately went to see how they were suffering.  When the sinners saw Him, they called out even louder for help,  trying to escape their torment. Nārāyana was greatly moved,  thinking that these people were suffering because of His arrangement. Out of His body He then manifested Ekādaśī, the  goddess of the eleventh lunar day. All the suffering sinners  started following the Ekādaśī-vrata, and were immediately promoted to Vaikuntha.
Satisfied with the new arrangement, Lord Visnu returned  to his abode. Not everyone was satisfied, however: soon Pāpapurusa came to meet the Lord. Crying and sobbing, he prayed  to the Lord, saying that he needed His protection. After  Ekādaśī came, he said, my life has been destroyed. You created  me to take care of the sinners, but whatever sins they do are  immediately washed away on Ekādaśī. I cannot resist her,  since she was born directly from You. Please help me! The
whole world will soon be empty if this goes on! On Ekādaśī, I  have no shelter anywhere.
The Lord smiled and told Pāpapurusa not to worry. From  now on, He said, you will have a safe abode in food on Ekādaśī.  On that day you can enter all kinds of eatables, and anyone  who then eats you will at the same time eat all kinds of sin. In  this way you will be safe on Ekādaśī, and not everyone will  automatically be liberated.
Historically, it is more difficult to find the origins of the  Ekādaśī-vrata. The word vrata appears already in the Rg Veda  (e.g. 2.38.7, 10.10.5), but scholars have different ideas about its  meaning. The most probable alternative seems to be that it is  derived from the verbal root vr with the suffix -ta, meaning  `that which is willed' or simply `will', developing into `law' and  `ordnance'. Already in the Upanisads one can see examples of  vratas in the sense used in this book, a vow or holy observance  that includes some rules and restrictions placed upon oneself  for the attainment of a higher good. The classic dictionary of  Amara defines a vrata as `synonymous with regulations, consisting of fasting, etc, and leading to merit'.
Descriptions of the Ekādaśī-vrata are not found in the  Mahābhārata (though Dvādaśī-vratas are mentioned in chapter i8 of the Aśvamedhika-parva, in the Vaisnava-dharma part),  but almost all Purānas have at least a few chapters devoted to  some Ekādaśīs. Dating the Purānas is a notoriously difficult  task, but it is safe to say that at least the Bodhanī Ekādaśī was  known by the fifth century A.D. The popularity of Ekādaśī  grew steadily, as can be seen in the Purānas and Upa-purānas,  where the different Ekādaśīs are given more and more attention. The popularity of Ekādaśī is also shown by the amount of  text which mediaeval writers on dharma devoted to its rules  and details.
Vratas such as Ekādaśī were very much a part of popular  Hinduism, since they were open to all varnas and āśramas and  offered great results with comparatively little effort. It is naturally hard to say how many people followed the rules strictly,
but at least by the eighteenth century the popularity of Ekādaśī  had waned. Abbé Dubois, writing in Madras around the beginning of the nineteenth century, reported that a very small  number of devotees actually followed the rules of Ekādaśī. In  Bengal, Ekādaśī came to be seen as an observance meant almost  exclusively for widows. A recent study (Freed & Freed: Hindu  Festivals in a North Indian Village) of religious rituals in a north  Indian village found that only a few brāhmana ladies observe  Ekādaśī.
In modern times, many Hindu reformers have tried to repopularise the Ekādaśī-vrata. The main arguments these persons put forward are connected with astrology, health and following the ancient Indian tradition. Still, their impact has  been rather limited. The efforts of A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swami  Prabhupāda (the founder of the International Society for Krsna  Consciousness) and his followers have succeeded in spreading  the Ekādaśī-vrata to many people in the western countries.
THE MEANING OF EKADAŚI
The main reason why Vaisnavas follow the Ekādaśī-vrata is  not freeing themselves from hell (as in the story above), but  pleasing Visnu. On this day Vaisnavas strive to minimise eating, sleeping and other worldly activities and instead increase  their devotion to Visnu. In the same way all great religions of  the world contain holy days and festivals when the laity gets a  chance to increase the intensity of its religious life. The ideal is,  of course, to live a life of constant religious ecstasy, but for most  people this seems impossible. For them holy days and festivals  with special religious observances are very useful. They also  play a great part in connecting new generations with the faith  of their ancestors.
Ekādaśī means the eleventh. It is believed that on the eleventh day of the waxing and waning moon, the moon causes  great agitation in the eleven senses of the human body. For this  reason one should regulate his eating and drinking on this day,
so as not to get completely carried away by sensual desires. If  one does not follow the rules which the sages of yore have set  down for this day, one will implicate oneself in sin and gradually become degraded.
The idea is certainly not to simply fast and stay awake, but  to do these things so that one can engage as much as possible  in hearing and praising the glories of the Lord. One popular  explanation (different from the one given in this book) of the  word upavāsa or fasting is'to be close'. This implies that fasting  should be more than just refraining from food. If fasting distances us from service to the Lord, it is not real upavāsa. Fasting is a means to the end, devotion to Krsna, and it may not  work for all.
There is also another understanding of Ekādaśī. The advanced devotee no longer thinks of Lord Krsna as the majestic  supreme Lord, but as his dear master, friend, son or lover. Just  as our senses are easily agitated on Ekādaśī, he thinks, so are  Krsna's. In other words, this day is a great opportunity to please  Krsnás senses! For this reason, he endeavours to worship the  Lord as opulently and well as possible on this day, when the  unlimited opportunities for pleasing the Lord seem to grow  even further.
WHO WROTE THE  HARI-BHAKTI-VILASA?
There is some controversy concerning who actually wrote the  Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. In the opening verses and at the end of  every chapter (or Vilāsa,'manifestatioń ) the book itself clearly  says that it was written by Gopāla Bhatta Gosvāmī. Jīva  Gosvāmī, however, lists the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa amongst the  works of his uncle Sanātana Gosvāmī at the end of his Laghutosanī written about 1582, as does Krsnadāsa Kavirāja in his  Caitanya-caritāmrta (e.g. z.i.35) from about the same time. It  is hard to believe that these scholarly persons, who probably  both had met and studied under Gopāla Bhatta and Sanātana
Gosvāmīs, would have made a mistake in ascribing the work  to Sanātana Gosvāmī.
Later tradition tries to reconcile these statements. Manohara  Dāsa writes in his Anurāga-vallī (from 1696) that Sanātana  Gosvāmī wrote the main text but Gopāla Bhatta collected the  supporting verses. Narahari Cakravartī writes in his Bhaktiratnākara (1.197-198) from the early i8`h century that the idea  of writing such a book originated with Gopāla Bhatta, but  that Sanātana Gosvāmī was the one who actually carried out  the task, writing in the name of Gopāla Bhatta.
The validity of these conjectures is lessened by a study of  the text and its commentary. The commentary named Digdarśinī to the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa is unnamed, but tradition  has associated it with Sanātana Gosvāmī. A.C. Bhaktivedānta  Swami Prabhupāda mentions in his purport to Caitanyacaritāmrta, verse 2.1.35, that some people think the commentary was written by Gopinātha-pūjā Adhikārī, a disciple of  Gopāla Bhatta. Neither name is mentioned in the commentary itself, but the commentary praises Śrī Madana-mohana  at the beginning. It is well-known that Sanātana Gosvāmī  worshipped Madana-mohana, while Gopinātha was the head  priest of Rādhā-ramana. A few times the commentary also refers to the Brhad-bhāgavatāmrta by Sanātana Gosvāmī (e.g.  the commentary to i6.aoz), a book that is not very often quoted.  Sanātana thus seems a more probable alternative. In that case,  both the book and the commentary would be written by Sanātana Gosvāmī. For an author to write a commentary on a text  of his own is not uncommon.
In style, however, the commentary differs from the main  text. The main text places little emphasis on many things considered fundamentals of Gaudīya Vaisnavism, such as the  joint worship of Rādhā and Krsna, while the commentary  dwells on them as often as possible (for example i6.r9g-ao3).  The two were certainly not written at the same time. Some  editions of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa contain a verse at the end  stating that the book was completed in the autumn of 1534.
Even were this verse not genuine, the book must have been  written before 1541, since it is quoted in the Bhakti-rasāmrtasindhu of Rūpa Gosvāmī (e.g. 1.2.72), written in that year. The  Bhakti-rasāmrta-sindhu, again, is mentioned in the commentary of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (m.63r). The commentary must  thus be younger than the book itself.
The commentary often quotes verses that could very well  have been included in the main text. Examples are the very  lengthy quotation about Bhaimī Ekādaśī from the Matsya Purāna (14.182) and the additional mantras in connection with  Pavitrāropana Dvādaśī (I5.202, 2i4). Had the author wanted  to add these things when going through the book some years  later, he could have easily included them in the main text. Indian authors would often revise their texts. A separate commentator would not add verses to a text written by someone else,  but mention them in the commentary.
Scholars have tried to find other solutions to the dilemma.  Dinesh Chandra Sen suggested that Sanātana Gosvāmī wrote  the book but put the name of Gopāla Bhatta in it, fearing that  the book would not be taken seriously by the orthodox section  of society, since he had been ostracised from the brahminical society because of his service to the Moslem ruler of Bengal. There  is, however, little evidence that Sanātana was actually ostracised.  The Caitanya-caritāmrta (z.i.t89) does mention that Rūpa and  Sanātana considered themselves polluted, but also (2.19.17) that  Sanātana studied the scriptures together with many great scholars during his time in the Moslem government. That would  hardly have been possible for an outcaste! Sanātana's name,  moreover, is mentioned in the beginning of Hari-bhakti-vilāsa  (r.2), where it is said that the book was written by Gopāla Bhatta  to please Raghunātha Dāsa, Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. If  Sanātana had been in such ill repute that he could not sign the  book in his own name, his name would hardly have been mentioned in this way either.
Professor O.B.L. Kapoor has presented another solution ín  his book`The Gosvāmīs of Vrindāvana' (p. 85-86). He thinks
that Sanātana Gosvāmī wrote a small book about Vaisnava  smrti, and that Gopāla Bhatta then enlarged that work into  the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa as we know it today. As evidence he  mentions that manuscripts of a work called Laghu ('smaller')  Hari-bhakti-vilāsa written by Sanātana Gosvāmī are available  in two libraries, and that the Sanskrit text after each chapter of  the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa says that the book was`vilikhitah', written in detail, by Gopāla Bhatta. Had Gopāla Bhatta been the  original author he would have written 'likhitah'. This argument is not so convincing either. Professor Kapoor told me  personally that one such manuscript is kept in the National Library in Calcutta, but even after a thorough search I could not  find it. Moreover, the term `laghu' rather seems to indicate that  the manuscript, if it really does exist, is a later abbreviation of  the voluminous Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. At least one such abbreviated version, Sādhana-dīpīkā, was made by Nārāyana Bhatta  Gosvāmī. The word `vilikhitah' also does not mean written in  detail according to the standard Sanskrit dictionary by Sir  Monier Monier-Williams, but simply scratched or written.
Even so, the main problem with this theory is something  else. If Sanātana really was the original writer, why did Gopāla  Bhatta not mention that in the book? In the beginning of every  part of his Sat-sandarbha, Jīva Gosvāmī mentions that his  book is based on the notes of Gopāla Bhatta. Gopāla Bhatta  would certainly similarly have acknowledged the work of Sanātana, had he based his book on it. There is no evidence of rivalry between the Gosvāmīs.
A simple explanation would be that Jiva Gosvāmī just  made a mistake in attributing the book to Sanātana, and that  that mistake was copied and circulated by Krsnadāsa Kavirāja,  thus causing great confusion in the later tradition. This is not  likely, however, since the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa itself became  quite popular. It is also evident from the text of the Caitanyacaritāmrta (2.24.329-344) that Krsnadāsa Kavirāja was familiar with the contents of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. My conclusion, therefore, is that the text was written by Gopāla Bhatta
Gosvāmī, while the commentary was written by Sanātana Gosvāmī some ten years later. Perhaps because of the great repute  of Sanātana Gosvāmī, the whole book and not only the commentary came to be seen as his work. There may also have been  some limited co-operation between the two.In any case, to  avoid the controversy, I will in this book use the the terms'the  author' for the author of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa and`the commentator' for the writer of the commentary named Digdarśinī.
CONTENTS OF THE HARI-BHAKTI-VILASA  The Hari-bhakti-vilāsa is a normative description of the conduct of the ideal Vaisnava, written in the common Anustubh  metre. It is comprised of twenty Vilāsas. The first Vilāsa deals  with guru, disciple and mantra. The second Vilāsa describes  initiation, the third through sixth the mandatory morning  rituals and worship, and the seventh the use of flowers in the  worship. The eighth Vilāsa concludes the topic of morning  worship. The ninth Vilāsa discusses Mahā-prasāda and other  topics, while the tenth describes the general qualities of a  Vaisnava and essentials of Vaisnava-dharma. The eleventh  Vilāsa deals with duties of the evening and night.
After thus describing the daily duties, the author goes on  to discuss the fortnightly duties of Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī in the  twelfth and thirteenth Vilāsas. The topic of the fourteenth  through sixteenth Vilāsas are different festivals and observances around the year. When the daily, fortnightly and  monthly worship has been described, the author deals in  Vilāsa seventeen with occasional rites such as different kinds  of puraścarana, preparatory rites. Vilāsa eighteen deals with  constructing images of the Lord, Vilāsa nineteen with installing the Lord, and Vilāsa twenty, the last, with constructing a  temple for the Lord.
All in all, the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa contains 925 verses. The  vast majority of these verses, however, are quotations from al
most two hundred Purānas, Smrtis and other ancient works.  The method of the book is to provide a verse or two about a  specific subject, and then support and illustrate that with copious and often repetitive quotations. This gives the work a  great deal of authority in the eyes of orthodoxy.
Some modern scholars and also Vaisnavas have been surprised by how the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa omits to mention many  things essential to Gaudīya Vaisnavism, such as the worship of  Rādhā and Krsna. While Srī Caitanya is praised in the beginning verse of each Vilāsa, not a word is said about worship of  him, nor is his mantra mentioned. The explanation for this is  quite simple: the work is clearly not intended for Gaudīya Vaisnavas alone, but as a guidebook for Vaisnavas in general. In  many places one is asked to proceed according to the rules of  one's particular sampradāya or group (e.g. 4.y5). For this reason, the author avoids things that he believes Vaisnavas from  other sampradāyas would object to.
It must also be added that at the time when the Haribhakti-vilāsa was written, a Gaudīya Vaisnava samprādaya per  se had not yet appeared in Vrndāvana, what to speak of ritual  worship of Śrī Caitanya, who at the time the book was finished had only quite recently left the world. In the early works  of the Gosvāmīs one can clearly see a desire to fit into a general  community of Krsna-devotees. For example, in his Bhaktirasāmrta-sindhu (1.2.269, 309) Rūpa Gosvāmī equates his  terms vaidhī- and rāgānugā-sādhana-bhakti with the terms  maryādā- and pusti-mārga of the Vallabha-sampradāya. Such  a desire to co-operate with other Vaisnavas is hardly surprising at a time when there were still very few Bengali Vaisnavas  in Vrndāvana.
CONTENTS OF THE PARTS  TRANSLATED IN THIS BOOK
The first Vilāsa (number xii) included in this book is called 'A  description of Ekādaśī'. This chapter draws heavily upon ear
lier works, such as the Caturvarga-cintāmani (z.r5) by Hemādri, Krtya-kalpataru by Laksmīdhara and Kāla-nirnaya by  Mādhava. Still, it contains some original parts and arguments.
The author begins by establishing that performing the  Ekādaśī-vrata is mandatory. In the Smrti-tradition, there are  three kinds of religious deeds. The first one is called nitya or  mandatory. These are the things that have to be done, whether  daily like worshipping the form of the Lord or less often, like  celebrating the appearance day of Krsna. The second group is  called naimittika or occasional observances, such as marriage,  and the third kāmya or optional observances, such as rites for  procuring wealth and so on. The author gives four reasons for  the Ekādaśī-vrata being mandatory, the main one being that it  pleases Lord Visnu. Also in later sections dealing with different parts of the vrata, the author always begins by establishing  that following the rules that will be mentioned is mandatory.
After this he discusses the question of adhikāra or eligibility. Some people think that only ascetics and widows have to  fast on all Ekādaśīs, but with many scriptural quotations the  author refutes this. Everyone between eight and eighty has the  eligibility. He also shows that married women are eligible for  the vrata, something that the Smārtas do not agree with. He  then gives different options for people that are not able to fast  completely for one reason or another. The main alternative is  to have someone fast on one's behalf. In order to avoid misuse  of this, the author stipulates that this has to be done without  payment.
Usually mandatory duties are thought to give no special result, but there are exceptions to this rule. The author cites numerous Purānic statements about the greatness of Ekādaśī.  The Purānas abound with lists of the great merit awarded by  different vratas and holy places. Reading these, even the most  pious reader will begin to doubt whether they may be a little  exaggerated. Most traditional scholars admit this, or then they  say that such results may appear in some cases, but not in all.  By giving great promises the scriptures try to get materially
motivated persons to engage in religious pursuits, something  that will gradually purify them. As in the case of Dhruva in the  Bhāgavatam, when the time for receiving the fruit comes, they  may well have become so purified that they have lost all interest in it. However, it is a great offence to consider the glories of  Lord Krsna or His name to be exaggerated. They are an exception to this.
Someone might argue that such great promises may tempt  people to lead an immoral life, thinking that Ekādaśī will burn  away all their sins committed during the rest of the month.  The reply to this is that such persons will simply cheat themselves. There is a general rule (quoted for example in the commentary to 12.517) for all vratas and religious observances stating that they have to be done without duplicity. Otherwise  they will not bear any fruit.
At the end of Vilāsa XII the author defines the Vaisnava,  since many rules are meant for such persons alone. He follows  the traditional definitions of the Purānas, placing stress on the  acceptance of a Visnu-mantra, but also on personal devotion to  the Lord. Some of the definitions quoted are clearly more of  ideals than requirements.
While Vilāsa XII contains mostly theory, the first part of  Vilāsa xiii, 'Celebrating the Visnu-vrata', is full of practical  rules of what to do and what not to do on the three days of the  vrata. These rules are practically all presented without any reasons being given. This does not mean, however, that there are  no such reasons. The prohibition against using brass plates for  eating, for example, is based on the belief that brass gives off  energy to anything that touches it. Food taken from a brass  plate thus becomes more agitating to the senses, something  that should be avoided during a vrata.
The full Ekādaśī-vrata begins on the preceding day, when  the main rules are that one is to proclaim the vrata one is to  perform, eat restricted food only once and sleep on the ground  during the night. On Ekādaśī, after finishing the morning duties, one should solemnly declare the vrata one is to perform
before the Lord and drink sanctified water. This is perhaps the  most important part of the whole vrata. Without this, some  authorities consider everything else useless. During the whole  day one is to fast and avoid certain things, such as sleeping.
The author defines fasting as more than simply refraining  from food. To fast is to refrain from sin and enjoyment by  cultivating good qualities. The idea is not simply to go hungry,  but to engage in devotional activities throughout the day. At  night, one is to stay up and sing and dance in front of the Lord,  read the Purānas or engage in other such activities. A long list  of alternatives is quoted. Before sunrise, special songs are to be  sung. At the proper time after sunrise the next day, Dvādaśī,  one is to break the fast. The vrata continues on this third day  with some restrictions: for example, one is not allowed to eat  again after breaking the fast, nor to sleep during the day. On  the Trayodaśī day life continues as normal.
Sometimes one is to fast on Dvādaśī instead of Ekādaśī.  Such a Dvādaśī is called a Mahā- or great Dvādaśī, and the eight  such Dvādaśīs are discussed in detail. They have particular rules  and mantras for the worship of the Lord. The main details of  worship discussed are those of installing and worshipping the  Lord in a kumbha and the offering of arghya. The commentary  is of great help in this connection, clarifying many details. Perhaps the most complete explanations are given for the Jayantīvrata. Some vratas also have special details: for example, on the  Pāpanāśinī-vrata one should honour the myrobalan tree.
Vilāsas XIV, xv and XVI discuss different festivals, and  amongst these special Ekādaśīs and Dvādaśīs that one is to  observe during the year. Those parts have been included in this  book. Some of these festivals involve rituals that should be  performed on Dvādaśī, while the fasting may be done on the  previous day. 'Fasting on this day' should be understood in  these cases to mean fasting in connection with that festival, either on the day of the festival or on the preceding day. Most  important of these are the Dvādaśīs at the beginning, middle  and end of Caturmāsya, the four months of the rainy period.
The festival of putting the Lord to sleep also includes  branding marks of the weapons of Visnu on the body. This sacred ceremony of showing submission before the Lord is uncommon amongst Gaudīya Vaisnavas (and even considered  forbidden for rāgānugā-sādhakas), though some teachers, for  example Baladeva Vidyābhūsana in his Prameya Ratnāvalī  (8.6-7), strongly recommend it. This branding is quite different from the images of branding cattle that may appear in the  western mind! The marks are light and will last about a year.  This section is based on chapter one of Vedānta Deśika's Saccarita-raksa. On the same day, one is also to accept some restrictions for the rainy period.
The festival of awakening the Lord at the end of Kārttika is  of great antiquity. It involves a cart festival, and is thus the most  elaborate of all festivals described in this book. After this, the  rainy period also comes to an end, and when breaking the fast  after the Ekādaśī one also completes one's Caturmāsya-vratas.
Two of the vratas in these chapters are meant to make up  for any lapses in the worship during the preceding year. These  are the festivals of offering a damanaka-plant in the spring and  that of offering a pavitra or cord in autumn. These festivals  have their origin in the Pañcarātra literature, and especially the  latter is considered very important. The vrata of offering a  damanaka-plant has obvious tantric influences in the Haribhakti-vilāsa, since the Lord here is worshipped as the God of  love. Both festivals require preparations made well in advance.
Two Ekādaśīs are meant for those who are unable to follow  all the Ekādaśīs and Dvādaśīs during the year. The first is  Bhaimī Ekādaśī, while the second and more well-known is  called Nirjala or the waterless Ekādaśī. On that Ekādaśī one is  to perform all the usual rites, but in addition to fasting from  food, one is also to refrain from drinking water. Since this  Ekādaśī occurs in the hottest time of the year, performing this  vrata is considered especially meritorious.
Another important Ekādaśī or Dvādaśī described is the  Śravana-vrata. When the asterism Sravana is combined with
Ekādaśī or Dvādaśī in the month of Bhadra, that is the appearance day of Lord Varāha. Varāha should be worshipped and  offered arghya, and one should also give gifts to brāhmanas  with a special mantra. In exceptional cases, one should fast for  two days in a row during this vrata.
At the end of the book I have added five appendices. The  first deals with calculating Ekādaśī, and the second with what  Jīva Gosvāmī writes about Ekādaśī in his Bhakti-sandarbha.  The third appendix contains the Vedic mantras that have been  referred to in the text, while the fourth gives the full text of one  song from the Gīta-govinda similarly referred to in the text.  The fifth and last appendix describes the Sarvatobhadra, a  mandala mentioned several times.
FOR WHOM IS THIS BOOK MEANT
As the author says at the end of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa  (20.366), he wrote it mainly for wealthy householders. Those  exclusive devotees who have attained the highest stage of indifference to the world and ecstatic love of Krsna (premabhakti) can dispense with outer rules and regulations. In the  same way, I think this book can be useful for householders  who have the time for following these vratas. In household life,  most of our time will not be used directly in spiritual pursuits.  In order not to lose track of the highest goal, love of Krsna, it is  useful to increase our devotional activities dramatically a few  times a month. I find Ekādaśī to be a wonderful means for  this. It is also a great way of strenghtening our faith, since it  gives very powerful spiritual experiences quickly. Even a sceptic will feel purified after completing a full Ekādaśī!
Following the different Ekādaśī- and Dvādaśī-vratas around  the year will also connect us more closely with our Vaisnava  heritage. For Vaisnavas in the west, festivals and vratas are a  good way to do this in an environment that constantly pushes  us to conform. For Vaisnavism to be able to survive the first  generation, what to speak of spreading further, I think such
cultural aspects must be stressed. The festivals mentioned in  this book are only a fraction of those described in the Haribhakti-vilāsa, but they are a good start. Naturally, for someone living in the west, following all the details (like for example  branding one's children!) will not be possible.
While the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa is written by a follower of Srī  Caitanya, it is meant for all Vaisnavas. One can easily add details from one's own sampradāya. In addition to the mantras  and rites mentioned in the text, one may add mantras addressed to the previous teachers and saints of the sampradāya  in the context of worshipping the guru.
I know of two Vaisnava books about Ekādaśī published  previously. The first one, Ekādaśī the Day of Lord Hari, by  Krsna Balarām Swami (The Bhaktivedānta Institute, San  Francisco 1986) contains stories about the different Ekādaśīs  collected from various Purānas. While the translations are  nice and the book is beautifully illustrated, the drawback of  this book is that the rules given for the Ekādaśī-vrata are influenced by Smārta ideas. It is thus not very authoritative for  Vaisnavas. The second one, Ekādaśī Mahātmya, The Glories  of Ekādaśī, by Bhūmipati Dāsa and Pundarīka Vidyānīdhi  Dāsa (Rasbihari Lal & Sons, Vrindāvana 2ooo) contains the  same stories, but also here many of the rules are different from  (and even contradict) those given in the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa.  OBJECTIONS
Some Gaudīya Vaisnavas who read this book may object to  different things in it. For such readers I have compiled the following section with possible objections and answers.
objection r. I have heard that the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa was  written to appease the Smārtas. That is why the book is so full  of hard and fast rules, while Gaudīya Vaisnavism generally  dispenses with such. Nowhere else have I heard of such strict  Ekādaśī rules.
ANSWER I. In the book there is no such statement. Actually,  according to tradition the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa was written on  the direct order of Śrī Caitanya, who also instructed the author to deal with Ekādaśī (See Caitanya-caritāmrta, z.a4.3q o3q.2). Nor is the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa alone in setting such a  rigid standard for Ekādaśī. Nārāyana Bhatta, perhaps contemporary with the author of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, gives exactly the same rules in his Sādhana-dīpikā, Prakāśas q and 5.  Jīva Gosvāmī also gives the same rules ín his Bhakti-sandarbha,  Anuccheda z99. I have included the portion about Ekādaśī as  appendix z in this book, since it is also a good summary. Rūpa  Gosvāmī also mentions following Ekādaśī as one of the ten  main processes of sādhana-bhakti in his Bhakti-rasāmrtasindhu 1.2.76.
objection 2. That may be, but such rules are meant for beginners practising vaidhī-sādhana bhakti. I follow the path of  rāgānugā-sādhana, the path that Srī Caitanya actually wants us  to tread. Following Ekādaśī is not conducive for rāgānugā bhakti.
ANSWER 2. As stated above, the author himself says that very  advanced devotees who have full faith in Krsna may or may not  follow all the rules of the book. Jīva Gosvāmī disagrees with this,  and thinks that they too should follow Ekādaśī. See appendix a.  If you are that advanced, you are free to follow your heart. If you,  however, are still on the platform of sādhana-bhakti, you should  follow the advice of Viśvanātha Cakravartī in his commentary  to Bhakti-rasāmrta-sindhu 1.2.295. In that verse Rūpa Gosvāmī  states that both internally and externally rāgānugā sādhakas  should follow in the footsteps of the residents of Vraja. Viśvanātha writes that this means that one should perform service  under the guidance of the handmaids, etc, of Rādhā and Krsna  in one's internal meditation, while one externally should follow  the example of the six Gosvāmīs of Vrndāvana. Out of five  Gosvāmīs who wrote anything, four strongly advice us to perform the Ekādaśī vrata. Following Ekādaśī is thus certainly to  follow in the footsteps of the Gosvāmīs!
Ekādaśī is actually of great help in rāgānugā-sādhana. In  his Rāga-vartma-candrikā, Viśvanātha Cakravartī states that it  helps one remember Govinda, and that breaking Ekādaśī  leads to Nāma-aparādha. Most authorities think that remembrance of the asta-kalīya-līlā should take place at the corresponding time of the day or night. In order to be able to contemplate all the 1ī1ās one will thus have to stay up during the  night. Fasting also makes the mind and senses less prone to  distraction, the main problem in meditation.
OBJECTION 3. This book is full of promises of material rewards  for those who perform Ekādaśī. `One who does this goes to  heaven for ten million years . I am a servant of Krsna, and I am  not interested in material enjoyment, going to heaven or liberation. If I get such boons, they may in fact distract me from  my service to the Lord.
ANSWER 3. Such promises are meant to attract Vaisnavas  who still have material desires. The author and the commentator both state that the main fruit of Ekādaśī is pleasing Krsna.  Any other fruits are secondary. Krsna would never be so cruel  that he would give a disinterested devotee a fruit that would  distract him. In fact, that would be a logical contradiction. If  one really has no material desires, how could material things become temptations? In the Srīmad Bhāgavatam (5.19.27) Krsna  also promises not to give his devotee anything that would distract him. Besides, Ekādaśī is a great way of purifying the  heart of unwanted desires.
OBJECTION 4. I could never do all the things enjoined in this  book. I have a hard time fasting even for half a day! If I fast I  just become tired and irritable. Instead of thinking of Krsna I  only think of eating. I don't understand how that could be conducive for my spiritual life.
ANSWER q. Fasting is, in my experience, a matter of training and enthusiasm. My first Janmāstamī was hellish (I had to  break the fast in early evening), but after a while I got used to
fasting. I find that the main things are enthusiasm and determination. If you have a hard time fasting, start by eating less,  then only once, and finally fast completely. At least fast on one  or a few Ekādaśīs. If Bhīma could fast once a year, anyone can!
As for thinking of eating instead of Krsna, that can be a  problem. Generally, hunger will come in periods, and then go  away. If you find yourself just thinking of food, engage your  mind in something else, such as reading or writing. And anyway, is it really the case that thoughts of food distract us from  thinking of Krsna? Do we find ourselves thinking that much  more about Krsna on normal days?
objection 5. Krsna is a soft-hearted, fun-loving God. Why  would He be happy by seeing us torturing ourselves by fasting  and keeping awake the whole night? Wouldn't He rather like  us to be happy in His service?
ANSWER 5. Precisely because Krsna is so soft-hearted, He  will naturally feel compassion and love for His servant when  the servant undergoes hardships in His service. Just like a  preacher invokes the compassion of Krsna by voluntarily accepting hardships and difficulties, so anyone can please Krsna  by performing the Ekādaśī-vrata. Ekādaśī is also not only about  not doing this and that; rather it is about increasing our service  by leaving out things such as eating or sleeping on this day.  OBJECTION 6. I have been told that on Ekādaśī one need only  fast from grains, anna. This is what is given as a refuge for Pāpapurusa in the classic story you also have provided in the beginning. In your book, however, you translate it simply as `food'.  Why such an extreme version?
ANSWER 6. Anna' basically means éaten' and thus food in a  generic sense, but has over time gradually assumed the meaning of grain, especially rice. Both meanings (food and grains)  are thus possible in this case. I have chosen to translate anna as  `food', since that makes the story consistent with other places  where it is explicitly said that one should not eat anything (see
for example 12.12-34). The prohibition against grains and especially rice on Ekādaśī amongst modern Vaisnavas arises from  the fact that if one is unable to fully fast, one is allowed to take  some light food on Ekādaśī, but never grains (see12.97-101).  OBJECTION 7. I am a member of ISKCON, and our founder Śrīla  Prabhupāda never told his disciples all the things contained in  this book. We stick to what he has said in his books, for they  contain all that you will ever need to know to advance in your  spiritual life.
ANSWER 7. Śrīla Prabhupāda seldom gave details of worship in his books. You will not find descriptions of mudrās,  mantras or other such things in them. There is, however, considerable evidence that Srīla Prabhupāda wanted his disciples  to learn such things. At least once, he asked his followers to  learn from the Rādhā-ramana temple in Vrndāvana, where the  standard of worship is very high. That temple is also the one  that most closely follows the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa of all the temples in Vrndāvana. In the purport to Caitanya-caritāmrta a.aq..  337 he writes that one as far as possible should consult the  eight Vilāsa of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa when it comes to details  of worship. I therefore do not think that he would have anything against his followers following a stricter standard of  Ekādaśī, provided, of course, that it does not interfere with  their particular service in the movement.
OBJECTION 8. I live in an ashram where my duties make it impossible for me to fast for such a long time, stay up the whole  night, and so on. I cannot give up my duties, for they are given  to me by my guru. He wants me to perform these duties and  says that if fasting interferes with them, I should at least eat a  little bit.
ANSWER 4. In this case you should do as your guru says. It  is actually said that the order of the guru never breaks a fast  (12.1oo). His order overrides other considerations. If you however feel a desire to increase your devotional service on Ekādaśī,
you should ask your guru for permission, and he can then tell  you what he thinks you should do.
NOTES ON THE TRANSLATION
I have used the edition of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa published by  Śrī Haridāsa Śāstrī of Vrndāvana. Even though it is a cheap  publication, it is quite good. It contains few misprints, and the  accompanying Hindi translation has at times proved helpful. I  have endeavoured to keep my translation as faithful to the  original text as possible, so that the mood of the text is not  changed. Still, in translating, one always has to make some  changes. The main changes I have made have been motivated  by a desire to make the English version more readable. While  the original is written mostly in the Anustubh metre, my  translation is in prose. When the text moves into a more'poetic' mood by using other metres, I have changed the translation accordingly into free verse. I have tried to keep as little  Sanskrit as possible in the translation.
Some readers like to see transliterated Sanskrit verses above  the translation. For them, I have included the verses written by  the author himself and mantras and prayers to be chanted.  Fearing to enlarge the book too much, I have not included the  Sanskrit text of other citations. Since the numbers of the verses  are given in the margin, the Sanskrit verses can easily be found in  the original if one wishes to check them.
I have included all the verses about Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī of  the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, not leaving out even the sometimes  rather long lists of different kinds of merit one will gain by doing something. What I have left out of the translation, however, is almost all of the astrological information of the text. I  have reasoned that since practically all Vaisnavas today use  pre-made calendars, they will not be so interested in the complex details about how to determine the date of a particular  Ekādaśī. Those that are interested in this, on the other hand,  will want to find the information without having to go through
the whole text. The modern Vaisnava calendars I have seen  unfortunately do not follow all the rules of the Hari-bhaktivilāsa. For these reasons, I have left out these verses and instead summarised their contents in appendix t. The verses left  out are given in parenthesis in the margin, e.g. (yo-i8i).
In translating the commentary, I have left out the parts that  explain the syntax of the verse in question, since that has already been taken care of by the translation. In cases where  different translations have been possible, I have followed the  commentary. Otherwise I have not left out anything from the  commentary, nor added anything.
In almost all cases I have kept the original headings and  subheadings. I have sometimes moved them a few verses back  or forward a few times for the sake of clarity. In the original, no  chapter or verse numbers for the cited texts are given. I have  tried to locate them, and the bibliography at the end lists the  books I have been able to consult. Some are difficult to find  (e.g. the Visnu Rahasya) and some completely lost (e.g. the Saura Dharma). Even the books I have found often do not contain  the verses ascribed to them.
There can be many reasons for that. Most of the Purānas circulated in recensions differing greatly from each other, and the  modern versions may be based on other manuscripts than the  ones the author had access to. The Skanda Purāna is one example of this. The author is not alone in quoting unidentified verses  from it; Hemādri and many other writers on Dharma quote numerous verses that modern scholars cannot find. Since these authors usually would borrow the verses from each other rather  than consult the original texts, mistakes may also have been copied. Some texts are especially elusive: the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna is quoted numerous times, but I have not been able to locate a  single one. This Purāna has probably been completely revamped  since the sixteenth century. The many Dharma smrtis cited are  another example of this. What now is known as the Devala  Smrti, for example, is only a fragment of the original text.
Many persons have helped me during my work. First of all, I  want to thank my publisher Christoffer Leka for his unflinching  support in this enterprise. From the beginning he constantly  urged and inspired me to go on. Kaisa Rautio created the Sanskrit font used in this book and entered the diacritics. The efforts of Mikko Hassinen and Kardamātmaja Dāsa made publication financially possible. My wife Laura gave her love and support, and helped edit the text. Martin Gansten, Vidyāvāgīśa,  generously offered his help with difficult Sanskrit passages and  did the final editing of the text. Professor Asko Parpola let me  use his extensive Purānic library. My initiating spiritual master,  Srīpād Suhotra Swami Mahārāja, Srīpād Gopānanda Bon  Mahārāja, Srīpād B.V Tripurāri Mahārāja and others gave inspiration and lent helping hands. I am grateful to them all.
Still, there is one person left to thank, the real reason for  the existence of this book. As it is said:
ekādaśī-vratam idam hari-tosanarh yad  yatnena tāta kuru nityam avaśyam eva  evam smito hrdaya-nātha uvāca dāsam  śrī-sadbhuja pranaya-drsti-dayāhhiraksa
`My dear, since this Ekādaśī-vrata pleases Hari,  diligently perform it, always and at all times:  Thus spoke the Lord of the heart to His servant.
O Sadbhuja! Protect us by giving us your loving glance!  Helsingfors, i8.2.aoot (Vijayā Ekādaśī)  Vaisnava-krpā-prārthī,
Bhrgumuni Dāsa
VILĀSA XII  DESCRIPTION OF EKADAŚI
INVOCATION  namo bhagavate tasmai yasya priyatamā tithih  1  ekādasi dvādasi ca sarvābhīsta-pradā nrnām
Obeisance to the Lord, whose dearest tithis  Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī fulfill all desires of men!  DIG-DARŚINI-TIKA:
śrī-caitanya-prabhum vande yad-āśraya-rasāplutah  vāñchātītam phalaty eva manoratha-mahīruhah
I worship Lord Śrī Caitanya. Watered with the nectar of  devotion to Him, the tree of desire bears fruit beyond all  desires.
FORTNIGHTLY DUTIES
itthañ ca nityam kurvānah krsna-pūjā-mahotsavam 2  harer dine viśesena kuryāt tam paksayor dvayoh
Thus always performing one's duties, one should especially  perform a festival of Krsna-worship on the day of Hari during  both fortnights.
DDT: The day of Hari means Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī.  THE MANDATORINESS
OF THE EKADAŚI-VRATA
atra vratasya nityatvād avaśyam tat samācaret  3 sarva-pāpāpahariv sarvārthadam śrī-krsna-tosanam
Since this vrata a mandatory, it should certainly be performed.  It destroys all sin, bestows all riches, and pleases Śrī Krsna.
DDT: Here the author describes concisely the fruit of  the vrata.
4 tac ca krsna-prīnanatvād vidhi prāptatvatas tathā  bhojanasya nisedhāc cākarane pratyavāyatah
It is mandatory because it pleases Krsna, because it follows the  rules, because eating at that time is prohibited, and because of  the occurrence of sin when it is neglected.
DDT: He gives four reasons for the mandatoriness: z) the  vrata pleases the Lord, a) it follows the rules, 3) eating is  forbidden, and 4) when it is neglected one acquires sin.  Even though the main reason for its mandatoriness is  that one acquires sin by neglecting it, for those devoted to  Srī Visnu the most important reason is that it pleases the  Lord. In a general sense also, since one always hears about  the fault ín overstepping rules and regulations, and since  it fulfills rules and regulations, it must indeed be mandatory. Srī Hemādri and others have explained this in their  writings. More elaboration is not needed. Like this the  subject of mandatoriness should be understood also elsewhere.
I. PLEASING THE LORD
5-6 In the Matsya- and Bhavisya Purānas:`One who fasts on Ekādaśī should eat on Dvādaśī. Whether during the light or dark  fortnight, this is a great Vaisnava-vrata:
In the Agni Purāna: `On Ekādaśī one should not eat. This  is a Vaisnava-vrata:
DDT: Here he first writes about the main reason for the  mandatoriness according to the Vaisnavas. Vaisnavavrata means that it is a vrata dear to Visnu.
7-8 In the Brhan-nāradīya Purāna, in the beginning of the Greatness of Ekādaśī (21.2,3): `O brāhmanas! By brāhmanas, ksatriyas
, vaiśyas, and also by śūdras and women, this vrata which
gives liberation, and which is dearest to Visnu, should be performed with devotion. This vrata called Ekādaśī, which bestows  all desired fruits and which makes Visnu pleased, should always  be performed, especially by the brāhmanas:
2. FOLLOWING THE RULES
Kanva Rsi: `One should fast on Ekādaśī. This should never be 9-m  overstepped: In the Agni Purāna:'Fast on Ekādaśī, o King, for
as long as you live!' Also in the Visnu-rahasya: As long as one  lives one should not give up Dvādaśī:
3. EATING IS FORBIDDEN
In the Nārada- and Padma Purānas (6.34.ii): `Beautiful one, 12  again and again the Purānas call out:"Do not eat, do not eat on
the day of Hari!"'
DDT: `Beautiful one' is said by Siva to Durga in the Padma  Purāna, and in the Nārada Purāna by Rukmāńgada.
And also: `O king, the hundred Agamas and the Itihāsas call i3-r8  out:"Do not eat, do not eat on the day of Hari!" The whole as
sembly of sages called out to Nārada and the others: "Do not  eat, do not eat on the day of Hari!"' In the Visnu-smrti:'One  should never eat on Ekādaśī: According to the statement of  Śrńgi Rsi:`Even a pregnant woman should not eat on Ekādaśī:  In the Brhan-nāradīya Purāna (21.5): `One who desires the  fruit of the fast should avoid the four times of eating: at night  on the previous and following day, and at midday and night on  the middle day.' Elsewhere: 'In the evening of the preceding  and following day, and midday and evening of the middle day:  these four times of eating should be avoided by one who desires the fruit of fasting.'
DDT: One who desires the fruit of the fast which  pleases the Lord, and so on, should give up four meals.  These are the meals on the evening on the preceeding
day, midday and evening on the day of fasting, and  evening on the next day.
It is said that`In a mandatory vrata one should give up  two meals, and in an optional four.' This distinction between mandatory and optional is for materialistic nonvaisnava householders.
Amongst all Vaisnavas this vow is mandatory. To hear  about the result, etc, like one does in the Darśapaurnamāsa and other sacrifices, does not interfere with the  mandatoriness.
NEGLECT IS SINFUL
i9-ZZ In the Srī Nārada Purāna (r.a3.8-9):'Whatever sins there are,  such as killing a brāhmana, enter food on the day of Hari. One  who eats on the day of Hari incurs all these sins: Elsewhere  (t.a3.6):`Who eats on the day of the killer of Madhu, eats all the  sins of the earth.` In the Skanda Purāna (4.95.37): A killer of  his mother, father, brother and guru is the one who eats on  Ekādaśī. He will fall from Vaikuntha.'
DDT: He who eats becomes a killer of his mother and so  on. This means that he incurs the sins acquired by killing  all these. That he will fall from Vaikuntha means that he  will never attain it. Vaikuntha can also mean the Vaisnavas.  In this case it means that.he will not attain their company.
22-24 Furthermore, in the same book, in a conversation between Umā  and Maheśvara: `Mahādevī, the servants of Yama will throw  burning red-hot iron in the face of him who eats on the day of  Hari.' In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna:`He who eats on the day of  Visnu eats only sin. During this day all sins reside in food. He  who eats them in his illusion is not released from them: And also:  'Who does not honour his father? Who does not worship his  mother? Who corrupts the Uedas? Who eats on the day of Hari?'
a5-a7 In the Visnu-dharmottara: A brahmacarī, grhastha, vānaprastha or sannyāsī who eats on Ekādaśī verily eats the flesh of  a cow! The dharma-śāstras mention atonements for killing a  brāhmana, drinking alcohol, theft and disgracing the bed of  the guru, but not for one who eats on Ekādaśī. A sinful man
goes to hell alone, o king, but he who eats food on Ekādaśī sinks  down together with his ancestors:
In the Padma Purāna, Uttara-khanda: 'He who says "Eat! a8-3.  Eat!" on the day of Hari actually says"Kill cows, brāhmanas and  women! Drink wine!" He is degraded. Even sacrificial cakes,  slender-waisted one, can never be eaten on the day of Hari, what
to speak of cooked food!'
In the Sanat-kumāra-samhitā: `Best of munis, if someone 3I-33  eats in a Srāddha-sacrifice on Ekādaśī, he eats filth like urine
with every bite: In the Gautamīya-tantra: 'If a Vaisnava by  madness eats on Ekādaśī, then his worship of Visnu is worthless. He attains a terrible hell: In the Visnu-rahasya: `If a man  according to the rules begins the excellent Dvādaśī-vrata but  then breaks it, he will go to the hell called Raurava:
This particular sin applies also to a widow. In the Kātyā- 34-3'  yana-smrti:`When a widowed woman eats on the day of Ekā
daśī, her good fortune will be lost, as if she had miscarriages  day after day.' In the Nārada Purāna: A very ascetic widow or a  sannyāsī who does not follow Ekādaśī is cooked in Andhatāmiśra until the final destruction:
THE VRATA IS MANDATORY
DURING BOTH FORTNIGHTS
As said by Devala Rsi:`One should not drink water from a conch- 36  shell, one should not hit a tortoise or a hog, and one should not
eat on Ekādaśī during either fortnight:
DDT: In this and the following verses he makes it clear  that because of fasting the vrata is mandatory even during  the dark fortnight, on sankrānti, and so on.
(37-61  ŚRADDHA IS FORBIDDEN
ON THE DAY OF THE FAST
In the Padma Purāna, Puskara-khanda:`Rāma, when Srāddha 69-7  falls upon Ekādaśī it is occasional and should not be per
formed on that day but on Dvādaśī: Also in the same book,  Uttara-khanda:`When the day of the death of one's mother or  father coincides with Ekādaśī, Śrāddha should be done on  Dvādaśī, never on the day of fasting. Gods! The forefathers  will not accept forbidden food:
71-72 In the Skanda Purāna:`When Ekādaśī is mandatory Śrāddha is occasional. It should not be performed on the day of the  fast but on Dvādaśī: In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna: `King, if  one performs Śrāddha on the day of Ekādaśī, these three will  go to hell: the offerer, the eater and the deceased:
DDT: In the Skanda Purāna, etc, it is said: `Peacockfeathered one, if there is a fast on the day of Śrāddha, one  should perform the Srāddha and then take all the remnants of the food in his right hand and smell it. This is  Śrāddha, Peacock-feathered one. It pleases the forefathers, son, but it does not break the vrata.' This should  however be understood as pertaining to non-vaisnavas.  The conclusion is that it is not suitable for Vaisnava forefathers to accept Srāddha on the day of Śrī Visnu.
ELIGIBILITY FOR FOLLOWING THE VRATA  73-74 In the Agni Purāna: A grhastha, brahmacarī, vānaprastha or  sannyāsī should not eat on Ekādaśī of either fortnight: In the  Padma Purāna, Uttara-khanda, a conversation between Śiva and  Parvatī:'Fair-faced one, all varnas and āśramas should fast on  Ekādaśī, the women also. There is no doubt about this:
DDT: Wishing to establish that everyone should always  fast, he first describes the eligibility of all the four  āśramas with the verse from the Agni Purāna. Earlier it  was stated:'By brāhmanas, ksatriyas, vaiśyas, and also by  śūdras and women...' (i2.7), and later on it will be dedared:'Men and women should fast: (12.77) With these  statements he shows that the four varnas, untouchables  and women are all eligible. The statements A widowed  woman who eats on Ekādaśī...' (12.34) and'... with her  son and husband she should fast (12.47) show especially  that both widows and wives are eligible.
Now, it is said by Manu:'There are no sacrifices, vratas  or fasts for women' (Manu-samhitā 5.r53), and also by  Visnu Rsi: A woman who fasts while her husband lives  loses her.life and her husband goes to hell: These statements apply to women who fast without the permission  of their husbands. Indeed, Śañkha and Likhita say:`With  the permission of her husband she may as she desires perform vratas, fasts, and so on: Otherwise these statements  can be understood as pertaining to women who are not  Vaisnavas. This is the conclusion.
In the Kātyāyana-smrti: 'A man older than eight and younger 75-7  than eighty should fast on Ekādaśī during both fortnights: In
the Nārada Purāna:A person older than eight but not yet eighty  who eats on the day of Visnu in my land is a sinner. I will kill him  or drive him from the country in due course of time. In this way,  o brāhmana, men and women should fast on Ekādaśī during  both fortnights:
In the Visnu-dharmottara: A Vaisnava or Saiva should per- 78-8  form the Ekādaśī-vrata: In the Saura Purāna: A Vaisnava, Sai
va or Saura should perform it', and in the Skanda Purāna, by  Śrī Śiva:A Śaiva, Saura, āśrama-dweller or tīrtha-servant who  eats on the day of Visnu is no better than a dog-eater. Even if  he has taken refuge in me, one who eats on the day of Hari has  displeased me with his vile sin:
WHAT TO DO WHEN UNABLE  TO PERFORM THE VRATA
In the Vāyu Purāna:'When the sacrificer is unable to fast he may 8a-8  engage his sons, or other brāhmanas. Otherwise he should accor
ding to his means give donations to most qualified brāhmanas.  For him who fasts for the benefit of others the pious fruit is hundred-fold. The woman who fasts on Ekādaśī on behalf of her husband also gets the whole fruit, and her husband, say the sages who  see beyond, gets without doubt the fruit of her fast a hundredfold:
In the Varāha Purāna:`When the body is too weak or when 86  one has already begun the vrata, one can engage his faithful wife
or obedient son, sister or brother. In this way the vrata is not  broken:
87-9o In the Kātyāyana-smrti:'One who fasts on behalf of his father, mother, husband, brother or guru attains a hundredfold  merit. Here one should give no remuneration, since the fasting  should be done as a favour. When a householder brāhmana  fasts on Ekādaśī on behalf of a ksatriya he will without a doubt  attain half of the fruit together with his dear ones. O brāhmanas, those who fast on behalf of their grandfathers will attain the  same fruit, nay, indeed they will attain a tenfold merit. There is  no doubt about it:
9i In the Mārkandeya Purāna: A child, ill or elderly person  may take one meal at night, consisting of milk, roots and fruit.  In this way Dvādaśī is not broken:
DDT: What is someone who is unable to fast to do if he  has no wife or anyone else who can fast on his behalf? The  answer is given in this verse and up to verse 96. Because one  fasts both on Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī, Ekādaśī is sometimes  indicated by the word'Dvādaśī: Also, since Ekādaśī can  sometimes be mixed with Daśamī (and should in that case  be avoided),`Ekādaśī' also occasionally refers to Dvādaśī.
92-93 In the Baudhāyana-smrti:`Those who are younger than eighty  but not able to fast should take a single meal, says Baudhāyana  Muni: And also: `Those who are overwhelmed by a disease,  whose bodies are too full of bile and those more than thirty  should eat at night:
DDT: 'More than thirty' should be understood as `plus  thirty.' Since it is said that`sixty is the best age', one should  add thirty to that. The meaning is thus ninety. Otherwise, the statement'at the age of fifty one should go to the  forest' indicates that a householder should live fifty years  at home. Adding thirty to that, one arrives at eighty, the  age that was indicated in the`older than eight and younger  than eighty'-verse (12.75).
94-96 In the Kūrma Purāna: A child, ill or elderly person may take  one meal at night. In this way his behaviour does not violate
Dvādaśī: In the Bhavisya Purāna, Dvādaśīkalpa:`Having worshipped Lord Visnu on Ekādaśī one may sometimes fast and  then offer prayers and eat at night. Dear son, one who eats once  does not break Dvādaśī. One who follows this one rule is  never lost:
RULES FOR EATING  AT NIGHT AND SO ON
In the Vāyu Purāna:`Eating at night means havisyānna or other 97-98  food such as fruit, sesame, milk, water and ghee, and the five  products of the cow if the bodily airs are disturbed. This is right,
the best of the best: In the Bhavisya Purāna (z.96.4):`Better than  fasting is to eat food obtained by begging, better than that is to  eat food obtained without effort, and better than that is to eat at  night. Therefore one should live by eating at night:
Also: `Fear, illness, madness and guru-given punishment. 99-100 All of these the scriptures declare as not breaking the fast: In
the Mahābhārata, Udyama Parvan: `These eight things do not  break a vrata: water, roots, fruit, milk, havis, the desire of a  brāhmana, the order of the guru, and medicine:
EXCEPTIONS
In the Kāśyapa Pañcarātra: `If an initiated, devoted Vaisnava 101-102 eats food, even fruits or roots when I get up, go to sleep or turn
over in My sleep, I will never forgive his offence. I will throw  him down into a terrible hell, where he will stay until the destruction of the universe:
DDT: Here he gives an exception to the rule allowing  eating at night.'Offencé refers to his eating food, or to all  things he has done earlier on and now.
Elsewhere: 'He who eats fruit or roots or who drinks water 103  when I go to sleep, get up or turn in My sleep, thrusts an arrow
into My heart!'
DD I : In the previous verse he showed that Vaisnavas  should avoid eating on these three Ekādaśīs, and now he  shows that in the same way everyone should carefully  avoid it. `He thrusts an arrow into My heart' means that  he commits a great offence.
THE GREATNESS OF EKADAŚI  104 ittham susiddhe nityatve 'py agnihotrādivat phalam  citram syād iti māhātmyam ekādaśyā vilikhyate
Now, even though it has been conclusively shown that Ekādaśī  is mandatory, it still gives a wonderful fruit, like the Agnihotra  and other sacrifices. Thus the greatness of Ekādaśī is described.
DDT: First he showed that it is mandatory to fast during  both fortnights, then he established that everyone is eligible for performing the vrata, and then he firmly declared  that those unable to follow the vrata completely may take  one meal. In this way he has shown that the vrata is mandatory and not dependent on any fruit. Now he wishes to  show the great rewards the vrata brings.
However, is it not that any fruit contradicts the mandatoriness? He answers this by saying'like the Agnihotra  and other sacrifices: `Other' refers to Darśapaurnamāsī  and other sacrifices. Just as one hears of their respective  fruits, although they are mandatory, so it is also here.  That this is proper has been clearly demonstrated by  learned teachers such as Śrī Krsnadeva and Vopadeva.  What is the need of more elaboration? 'Wonderful'  means that it is extraordinary in many ways because of a  combination of the mundane and the divine.
105-107 In the Tattva-sāgara:`Like a mother for children or like medicine  for the diseased, the Ekādaśī tithi is made for protecting all the  peoples. Amongst those who have human forms, suffering different kinds of distress here in the cycle of birth and death, those  who fast on Ekādaśī are wealthy, and also wise. He who gives up  Ekādaśī and follows another vrata is like a man who throws away  a great jewel held in his hand and then asks for dirt.
O Janārdana, after fasting even on one Ekādaśī only and 108-111  then worshipping with nothing but water, one attains libera
tion from the cycle of birth and death. Lord of all gods! Even  he who fixes his mind on Ekādaśī by mistake, greed or deceit is  freed from all kinds of suffering. Ekādaśī is the greatest medicine for curing the terrible disease of the suffering embodied  living beings. Sinful people, bitten by the snake of repeated  birth and death, can certainly attain happiness by fasting on  Ekādaśī:
In the Nārada Purāna, Vaśistha says (z.i.io-i8):'O king, by m3-it4  the fire of Ekādaśī the wood of sin is turned to ashes: so also a
hundred births. Among people there is no sin, o king, that the  day of Padmanābha could not eradicate. O lord of men, as long  as people do not fast on the day of Padmanābha there will be  sin within their bodies.
DDT: The word'peoplé again indicates the eligibility of  everyone.
A thousand horse sacrifices and a hundred Vājapeya sacrifices m5-n8  do not amount to even a sixteenth part of fasting on Ekādaśī.
My lord, any sins committed by the eleven senses are all destroyed by fasting on Ekādaśī. There is no destroyer of sin like  Ekādaśī, for it also gives heavenly liberation, overlordship, sons,  a good wife and a body free from disease!
'O king, Sañgā, Gayā, Kāśī, Puskara, Kuruksetra; the Revā, m9-tzr  Uedikā, Yamunā or Candrabhāgā: none of these holy places or
rivers can be compared to the day of Hari. Best of kings! Even  if performed in a deceitful way it will easily destroy sin and lead  one to the abode of Visnu, for it is like a wish-fulfilling stone,  an ocean, a desire tree, or all the Vedas:
Elsewhere in the same book: A man who, controlling his 122-124  senses, fasts on the day of Visnu should then worship Madhu
sūdana. All his sins burn up. What is the use of other austerities or sacrifices? Best of good men, those who turn to Ekādaśī   will attain four arms. Carrying Garuda-flags, flower garlands  and dressed in yellow garments, they are led into the temple of
Hari. Lord of the earth, thus the power of Dvādaśī, a fire for  the fuel of terrible sins, has been described by me:
125-127 And also:'By Yoga or Sañkhya one may attain My abode, o  brāhmana, or one may not, but those who follow the day of  Hari can attain it easily. When one celebrates Ekādaśī without  food one attains the full result of the vrata. Even one who fasts  on Ekādaśī because he has been thrown in jail will without  doubt attain the full result:
128-129 In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna:lls a forest fire consumes  both dry and moist wood, the day of Hari will burn all kinds  of sins. O Bhārgava, to destroy the dry and moist firewood of  terrible sin there is no other method than fasting on Ekādaśī:
DDT: Dry sins are those committed for a long time,  moist those committed in an instant. The difference is  that the atonement is greater for the first group.
130 And also: `O brāhmana, this Ekādaśī-vrata atones for everything and liberates one from birth and death. One who performs it will attain liberation. Visnu will Liberate a man who  sins during fourteen days but who fasts on the fifteenth!
DDT:`The fifteenth' here means Ekādaśī.
131-133 'This is the firm opinion of the seers in all the Purānas: one  who fasts on Ekādaśī is freed from sin. There is no doubt about  it. For those evil, fallen souls who follow terrible paths, there is  no liberation from birth and death except Ekādaśī:
134-136 And also: ` The essence, the doctrine, the truth, the vow, the  atonement: fasting on Ekādaśī is all this: Moreover:`For people to  remember Govinda and to fast on Ekādaśī is atonement. It certainly saves one from the cycle of birth and death: On this subject  is also said:'When Hari is praised on Ekādaśī with love and devotion or with fervent animosity, all impurities are destroyed.'
137 And also:`In this way this Ekādaśī-vrata is known as the emblem of Kali, the abode of all good qualities, religion and happiness. O Śaunaka, a man with faith observes this vrata and becomes dear to all scriptures and gods. He obtains liberation:
DDT:`The emblem of Kali' means that it is the best of all  religious obstervances.
At the end it is said there:`Who amongst men hears this, does r38  this, gives his approval and has people perform this with faith,
is completely freed from sin when he performs the Ekādaśī  vrata, and he attains the divine abode of Him whose ornament  is Garuda:
In the Padma Purāna, the greatness of Vaiśākha, in a con- i39-iqi  versation between the messenger of the gods and Vikundala:
"'If someone fasts on Ekādaśī even incidentally he will not go  to the abode of torture". This we have heard from Yama. O  vaiśya, whatever sin has been done by the eleven senses, all that  is destroyed by fasting on Ekādaśī. In this world nothing is as  auspicious as Ekādaśī. Even those who perform it deviously do  not go to the abode of Yama:
DDT: 'Incidentally' means that someone may perform  the vrata by chance, or to attain kingship, knowledge or  the like.
This section continues with seven verses identical to those from  the Nārada Purāna quoted above (m3-it9). And then (3.3i.r6q.):  `Lord of men, someone who has fasted on Ekādaśī in his child- 142
hood, youth or old age will never go to hell:
In the same book, the greatness of Vaiśākha, in a conversa- 143  tion between Yama and a brāhmana: `People who devotedly fast  according to the rules on Ekādaśī during both the dark and light  fortnight will attain heaven:
DDT:lAccording to the rules' means following the rules  for avoiding sin that will be described further on. With  the word `heaven' the higher world is indicated, and that  world is Srī Vaikuntha. Otherwise it can be understood  that on the way to Srī Vaikuntha one goes step by step.  Because one enjoys the bliss of heaven the word `heaven'  has been used. This is the conclusion.
Then follows a verse identical with the one from the Tattva- I44-I45  sāgara, beginning with'Like a mother', quoted above (105). And
then (6.59.14, 6.x34.io): `There is no remover of sin like Ekādaśī. One who fasts on that day according to the rules goes to  heaven. O brāhmana, whatever sins that have been committed  by the eleven senses are shaken off by the man who follows the  vrata. Quickly he will proceed to heaven:
146-i47 It is also said (6.37.62-65):`On one side was the dharma attained from all sacrifices, austerities at holy places and giving  of great gifts and on the other side the dharma from the Vaisnava-vrata. The creator weighed them here, and the second  proved heavier. All the devotees of the day of Hari called out:  `Acyuta! Acyuta!"
z48-z49 `O brāhmana, I do not punish, indeed, I fear those whose  son or grandson fasts on Ekādaśī! Such a great soul delivers a  hundred relatives through his power. A person who fasts during both fortnights will certainly get his enjoyment and liberation:
DDT:`I' is Yamarāja.
150-152 In the Padma Purāna, the greatness of Kārttika, in a conversation between Yama and Dhūmraketu (6.234.4-6):`People who  fully fast on Ekādaśī become liberated from all sins and go to  the supreme abode of Visnu. Beautiful one, Dvādaśī is certainly a giver of dharma, wealth, pleasure and liberation, it is a  cow giving men the milk of all desires. My friend, if someone  has fully completed even one Ekādaśī-vrata, what is the use of  charity or austere holy places for him, since Ekādaśī will fulfill  all desires when observed according to the rules?'
DDT: What is the use of charity, etc, since Ekādaśī will  fulfill all desires when observed according to the rules?  The sentence can also mean that Ekādaśī fulfills all desires that are according to the rules, or that Ekādaśī  through Brahmā fulfills all the desires. All desireś mean  all the desires of everyone. That indicates the attainment  of Vaikuntha.
r53 In the same book, Uttara-khanda, a conversation between Śiva  and Pārvatī (6.x34.9):`He who gives up Ekādaśī and performs
some other vrata throws away a great jewel held in his hand  and then begs for food:
In the Skanda Purāna: A single Ekādaśī, even without any 154-155  special stellar constellation, destroys the sins of men like a bad
king destroys the land. Charity, penance, holy baths or any  other pious deeds do not lead to liberation, beautiful one, without the day of Hari.
`By fasting on this day all amounts of sin disappear at once. r56  If we have one day of Hari on one side and giving the whole  world in charity on the other, the poets declare that they are
not the same. The day is said to be higher!'
In the same book, in connection with the churning of the 157-159  ocean of milk, Yama gives these instructions to his messengers:
`The sin of illicit sexual connections, killing a friend, etc, or  some other sin committed intentionally, that which arises  from speaking to a heretic or by associating with fallen people,  all that I wash away from those who fast on Ekādaśī. O messengers! The sin that arises from attaining gifts or from giving  up one's stage of life, that I also wash away from those who fast  on Ekādaśī:
DDT: `Stage of lifé means brahmacārya and so on.
And also:`O Śatānanda, that man who fasts on Ekādaśī will be 160-161  liberated by me on earth, and by him three generations of the
family. If someone does not eat on Ekādaśī but is otherwise  burdened with hundreds of sins, then you should disregard  the sins, for such a person is always dear to me:
Moreover:`Someone born in a family of dog-eaters who fasts 162  on Ekādaśī is splendid, but not a brāhmana who knows the four  Vedas but eats on the day of Hari:
In the Skanda Purāna, in a conversation between Brahmā 163-164  and Nārada: `Dvādaśī is known and praised by people as a  wish-fullfilling tree, the giver of all desired things and a be
stower of fortune. Child, the fruit attained by following the  day of Dvādaśī is not attained by a thousand horse sacrifices or  by bathing in ten million holy places:
165-167 `Those who perform the Dvādaśī of Hari attain honour  everywhere, do not fear illness, and have no fear of evil people  causing calamities. They know no fever, fatigue or pain, nor are  they ever separated from their children. They always remember Hari. They become ever attracted to narrations about the  Lord and have no fear at all. On the battlefield and in the palace, indeed everywhere they will be victorious.
168-169 'The mind of a man who is intent on Dvādaśī will always be  turned to dharma, and he will always have devotion to Krsna.  He is never touched by sin. Thus I tell you this secret after  having studied all the scriptures:"Give up all religious duties in  the age of Kali and celebrate the day of Hari!"
DDT:`Devotioń means devotion characterised by hearing, etc, or by ecstatic love.`Who is intent on Dvādaśī' can  also mean someone who performs Dvādaśī through lusty  desires. Even he is not touched by the sins he has performed.
If reading the greatness of the Dvādaśī-vrata leads to  following it, then that reading will also give freedom from  all kinds of suffering and obtainment of pious fruits.  Therefore he utters the following two verses.
170-171 `He who in the age of Kali reads this description of the greatness  of Dvādaśī will have no mental agony or illness causing different  kinds of trouble. The pious fruit attained by the devotees in the  age of Kali at Prayāga or Kuruksetra does not equal that which  men get from reading the greatness of Dvādaśī:
172-174 In the Bhavisya Purāna: `Ekādaśī is most auspicious, a remover of all sin, lighter of devotion to Visnu, bestower of the  highest gift. A man who fasts on it with devotion will not remain within the cycle of birth and death. He who does not eat  on Ekādaśī and then takes food on Dvādaśī will not attain the  netherworld. He will not see hell. One who has committed a  thousand sins, but fasts on Ekādaśī and then worships Visnu  on Dvādaśī, will not go to the netherworld.
175-176 'This tithi of Lord Visnu is highly meritorious, it bestows  happiness. Since the Lord of the universe certainly manifests
Himself on this day, it destroys all sin and removes all suffering. One should consider Visnumayī, the unlimited, all-pervading Śakti, to be the chaste Ekādaśī!'
Sanat-kumāra has said:'One who has performed a thou- 177-178  sand sins, even killed a hundred brāhmanas, will become pure
by fully fasting with devotion on one Ekādaśī! A man who  performs another vrata than Ekādaśī should understand that  its fruit will, like a tumour, bring nothing but suffering.'
In the Saura-dharma:'When Agnihotra and other sacrifices y9  are weighed against the Dvādaśī of the Lord, Dvādaśī is heavier.'
In the Devī-rahasya and in the Skanda Purāna:'Sin is said to 180-181  be fivefold: r) pātaka, 2) atipātaka, 3) upapātaka, 4) mahāpātaka
and 5) prakīrnaka. All these are destroyed by fasting on Ekādaśī,  just as pieces of mud are dissolved in water:
DDT: Sins of the'pātaká-category are those which cause  one to become degraded,'atipātaka' having sex with one's  daughter in law, etc, `upapātaká killing cows, etc,'mahāpātaká killing brāhmanas, etc, and'prakīrnaka' are many  kinds of small sins.
In the Devī-rahasya: Just as Gāyatrī here tears the net of sin 182-185  apart, so also Ekādaśī tears the net of sin apart: In the Vāyu
and Skanda Purānas: `That sin which comes from enjoying  forbidden things, eating uneatable foodstuffs, giving gifts to  unworthy recipients, blaspheming one's elders, or from pride,  infidelity, improper behaviour, stealing other's belongings, or  that which is performed while blinded by lust, that sin which  is pātaka or upapātaka: all that is destroyed by fasting on  Ekādaśī:
In the Visnu-rahasya Brahmā says:'Those great men who 186-187  even in their minds wish to celebrate Dvādaśī will not see the
terrible ocean of suffering in the cycle of birth and death: In  the Visnu Purāna: Just as within all the Vedas the syllable Om  is most worshipable, so amongst all vratas Dvādaśī is supreme:
In the Dvārakā-māhātmya Srī Candraśarman says to Srī i88-r89  Krsna (7.4.24.20):'Those sinful people who are devoted to Your
lotus feet will not suffer. What can one then say about those  men who have given up all sin and worship Dvādaśī?' In the  same book, Prahlāda says to Bali:As there is no heat in the moon  or cold in fire, so there is no sin amongst Vaisnavas who fast on  Ekādaśī:
DDT: In the next verses (190-197), from the Vaisnavatantra and other scriptures, he will now at the end especially show the great reward that the vrata dear to the  Lord gives, attaining devotion to the Lord and attaining  His abode.
190-192 In the Vaisnava-tantra:`Ekādaśī is greatly meritorious, dear to  Lord Visnu. The sins of those who fast on this day and worship Hari on Dvādaśī are destroyed. In them devotion to Visnu is born: In the Brhan-nāradīya Purāna, the beginning of  the greatness of Ekādaśī:`One burdened with a great sin, or indeed with all sins, who gives up eating on Ekādaśī will proceed  to the supreme destination: In the Vāyu Purāna: f1 man who  celebrates the Ekādaśī-vrata with devotion will become free  from all sins and go to the temple of Visnu:
193-194 In the Visnu-dharmottara Purāna:'A man who performs the  Ekādaśī-vrata with devotion will immediately be freed from all  sins, just as a snake sheds its skin. He will not encounter disease  or enter into hell. He should be bowed down to. He is worshipable, for he is dear to Vāsudeva:
195-197 In the Garuda Purāna: `That man who with devotion always performs the Ekādaśī-vrata attains the abode of Visnu,  he attains the nature of Visnu: In the Agni Purāna:`That man  who with devotion always performs the Ekādaśī-vrata attains  the highest abode, where Lord Hari dwells: In the Śiva Purāna:`That man who with devotion fasts on Ekādaśī will attain  the same abode as Visnu after having attained the same nature  as Visnu:
198 īdrń māhātmya-ratnāni śāstrāmbodhau sphuranty api  kah samgrahītum śaktah syād atra krsna-krpām vinā
Such pearls of the greatness of Ekādaśī glimmer in the ocean of  scripture. Who here is able to collect them without the mercy of  Krsna?
RULES FOR WHEN TO FAST
ekādaśī ca sampūrnā viddheti dvividhā smrtā I99  viddhā ca dvividhā tatra tyājyā viddhā tu pūrvajā
Ekādaśī is known as either full or mixed. There are also two  kinds of mixed Ekādaśīs, of which the one mixed with the previous should be avoided.
DDT: The Ekādaśī that is mixed with Daśamī, the previous tithi, should be avoided. That means one should not  fast on it.
Now, the Purāna-samuccaya and others say: `O king,  those desiring liberation should fast on the pure Dvādaśī,  but materialistic householders should without a doubt  fast on the Ekādaśī that is mixed with the previous:  These statements are rejected.
(200-336  In the Garuda Purāna:`If the sunrise touches even a fraction of 337
the Daśamī, then on that Ekādaśī Vaisnavas should not fast:  DEFINITION OF A VAISNAVA  grhīta-visnu-dīksāko visnu-sevā-paro narah 338
vaisnavas cātra samgrāhyah skāndādy-uktānusāratah  According to the statements of the Skanda Purāna and other  authorities, a man who has taken initiation into a Visnu-mantra  and is devoted to serving Visnu is to be accepted as a Vaisnava.
DDT: Who then is a Vaisnava? Fearing that someone  might ask whether a Vaisnava is one who has devotion to  the Lord or someone else, he writes this verse. These  rules pertain to such a person, but not to those who have  attained full faith in the path of devotion, since they do
not have to follow vratas and the like. This should be understood later also, when the rules of avoiding things  such as brass utensils on Dvādaśī and other days are described.
339-340 About this, in the Skanda Purāna: `One who never gives up  Ekādaśī, whether in the greatest misfortune or in a happy situation, his determination is Vaisnava. Who is equal to all living beings, who does not deviate from his own duties and whose all actions are connected with Lord Visnu, he is known as a Vaisnava.'
DDT: He is equal to all living beingś because he is not  violent and does not criticise, but treats everyone as he  would himself.'His own duties' refer to Vaisnava-dharma.
34I And in the Padma Purāna: `Those who follow rules of initiation, who have nyāsas and yantras and who meditate on a  twelve- or eight-syllabled mantra, or some other, and who are  attached to the worship of Visnu, are known as Vaisnavas:
DDT: Nyāsas and yantras are parts of the worship.`Some  other' refers to mantras such as the Srī Gopāla-mantra.  Since worship cannot be fruitful without initiation, initiation is also implied here. Of all initiated those attached  to the worship of Visnu are specified.
(342-4I3)  HOW TO RESOLVE DOUBTS  WHETHER OR NOT TO FAST
414 Śrī Brahmā says in the Visnu-rahasya: `The words and deeds  of those who always serve Visnu with their minds, words and  bodies, should be known as equal to Visnu:
DDT: If there is doubt because of a dispute between many  different astrologers and knowers of scripture, it should  be resolved by the statements of those devoted to the  Lord, not by others. Serving'with their minds, words and  bodies' means by remembrance, glorification, circumambulation and so on.
The Lord says in the Kūrma Purāna: `One should ask the 4i5-4r6  Vaisnava brāhmanas, conversant with the Vaisnava scriptures,
firm in their vratas and of pure behaviour, and then zealously  follow their advice: In the Padma Purāna, Vaisnava-tantra:  'The statements of those who know the Itihāsas and Puranās,  are acquainted with the conclusion of the Smrtis and who are  dear to Vāsudeva, are Vedic:
WHAT TO AVOID
In the Visnu-rahasya and Kūrma Purāna:'Statements not based 4y-4i9  on the authority of the Uedas, brāhmanas, Janārdana, Tantras or
the Dharma-śāstras, should be rejected: In the Vaisnava-tantra:  `Statements of those who have no devotion to the guru, uttering mantras or the supersoul, Visnu, should always be rejected: In the Skanda Purāna:`Statements of those who do not  have devotion to the Lord of all, Visnu, the most auspicious,  should not be accepted if one desires the perfection of one's religious endeavour.'
DDT: `The most auspiciouś can also mean 'or to Srī  Rudra:
And also: `The statements of men who blaspheme the Pañca- 42o-42t  rātras, Purānas and Itihāsas should certainly be rejected: Yajña
valkya also says: `The Purānas, Pañcarātras, Vedas and Pāśupatas are most authoritative. They should not be contradicted:  DDT:'Not contradicted' means not disputed through arguments based on false logic.
Thus ends the twelfth Vilāsa, called `Description of Ekādaśī',  in the Śrī Bhagavad-bhakti-viLāsa, written by Srī Gopāla Bhatta.




VILĀSA XIII  CELEBRATING THE VISNU-VRATA
HOW TO PERFORM EKADAŚI  AND MAHA-DVADAŚI  INVOCATION
vande caitanya-devam tam krsnam nitya-navotsavam 1  yasya prasādāt sidhyanti dīnasyāpi mahotsavāh
I worship Lord Caitanya, Krsna, the eternally fresh festival, by  whose mercy celebrations of even the fallen are successful.  DIG-DARŚINI-TIKA:
yasya śaktyāmśalābhena brahmāder api śaktayah  tās tā vibhānti tam vande sarva-śakti-pradam vibhum
I worship the Almighty, the bestower of all power, by a  fraction of whose power the powers of Brahmā and the  others glimmer.
Having described the Ekādaśī-vrata the author will  now discuss the celebration beginning at Daśamī. To accomplish the celebration of writing that, he worships the  Lord with this verse. The Lord is an eternally fresh festival for the devotees, or then His form is a festival of fresh  characteristics.
RULES FOR THE DAY BEFORE THE FAST  prātah-snānādikan krtvā suveśo dhauta-vastrakah 2  vratam sañkalpya kurvīta vaisnavaiś ca mahotsavam
Having taken their morning bath, etc, well dressed in fresh  clothes and having declared the vrata, the Vaisnavas should  perform the celebration.
DDT: `Etć means having performed all their morning duties such as sandhya-vandana. They should be `well dressed' by following the regulation for shaving, etc, for Vaisnavas on Daśamī. The unfavorable time for shaving is  given in the Ratna-mālā: `By those who have given up eating and unguents, have gone outside their villages or who  follow a vow, no shaving should be done on Navamī, the  ninth day. At initiation, release from prison, preparing for  death and marriage, on the order of the king and by brāhmanas: in all these cases the seers have declared shaving  auspicious: And also in the Smrti: `Hot water, unguents,  sleeping, shaving and sex: these should zealously be avoided on the three days beginning with Daśamī: This should  be understood as pertaining to non-Vaisnavas.
One should perform the celebration as has been described and as will be described further on, naturally always  behaving well. In particular, one should prepare the temple  of the Lord by cleaning it and so on, decorating it with banners and Aags, and then happily place the Lord on a beautiful throne. Then one should offer great worship with devotion, invite the Vaisnavas and respectfully sing and dance.
THE MANTRA OF DECLARATION  3 daśamī-dinam ārabhya karisye 'ham vratam tava
tridinam deva-deveśa nirvighnam kuru keśava  `Beginning on the day of Daśamī, I will perform a three-day vrata  for you, Lord of the god of gods. Remove all obstacles, Keśava!'
4 Even if the performer touches something untouchable he  should not bathe. In the Visnu-smrti: `He who, fearing impurity, bathes on the festival of Vāsudeva becomes impure. Anyone who sees him should enter water with all his clothes on!'  5 stutvātha bahudhā krsnarri ghosayen niyamānvitam
śrīrukmāńgada-mattebha- patahodghositam vacah
After one has praised Krsna in many ways one should proclaim the rules to be followed with words thundering like a  kettledrum on Śrī Rukmārigada's ferocious elephant.
DDT: During the festival one should in many ways  praise Krsna by hymns in prose and poetry. One should  proclaim the rules loudly and listen to them. `The rules'  means the rules for Daśamī, etc, which will be explained  further on.
About this it is said in the Nārada Purāna (2.23.32-34):`People! On the beginning of the day of Hari, stay at home and eat  only once. The food should be without ksāra and consist of  havisya. Sleeping on the ground and giving up the company of  your loved ones, remember God, the master, the most ancient,  highest person! Also on Dvādaśī you should only eat once:
And also:`To have sex with your mother is good. To eat the 8  Aesh of cows is good. To kill or to drink wine is also good, but  not to eat on Ekādaśī:
KSARA  Cereals, except mung-beans and sesame-seeds; beans; wheat 9  and kodrava (Perpelum Scrobiculatum); chickpeas and devagrains (Andropogon Saccharatus): this group is known as ksāra.
HAVISYA  Husked white winter rice, mung-beans and sesame, kalāya 10-13  beans, pigweed (Enastrus Paniculatus), vāstūka (Chenopodium  Album), sastika, jute (Corchorus Capsularis), radish, root bulbs
except taro (Colocasia Antiquorum), Sind- or sea-salt, gavya yoghurt, ghee, unskimmed milk - breadfruit (jackfruit), mango,  yellow myrobalan (Terminalia Chebula), pepper, cumin, ginger,  tamarind, banana, carambola (Averrhoa Acida), Indian gooseberry (Emblica Officinalis), sugar without molasses, all cooked  without oil: this the seers call havisya.
DDT: Sastika is a kind of quickly growing rice, or then a  kind of leafy vegetable.
OTHER PROHIBITIONS
14 In the Skanda Purāna: 'Brass utensils, meat, masura-beans,  honey, speaking lies, eating more than once and physical labour should be avoided on Daśamī:
DDT: In some readings'physical labour' is replaced with  overeating. That alternative is also acceptable.
15-16 In the Kūrma Purāna:`Brass utensils, meat, masura-beans, chickpeas, kodrava, leafy vegetables, honey, women and eating other  peopleś food should be avoided.` And also:'Brass utensils, meat,  masura-beans, eating more than once, sex, gambling and drinking much water: these seven should be avoided on Daśamī:
17 In the Matsya Purāna: `Brass, meat, wine, honey, oil, lies,  physical exertion, absence from home, sleeping in the daytime,  sex, stoneground flour and masura-beans: these should be given  up on Dvādaśī:
DDT: Earlier (4.130) it was said that when one bathes on  Daśamī one should certainly use oil. `He who bathes  without oil on Daśamī is ignorant: Here oil has been  prohibited within the rules for Daśamī, but there is no  contradiction, since there are different rules for materialists and desireless persons. This can be seen from the  continuation of the quoted passage: `His life, intellect,  fame and strenght are all four destroyed: In this way contradictions should be resolved elsewhere also.
18 In another Smrti: `On Daśamī he who eats only once should,  controlling the senses, do ācamāna and then use a twig for brushing the teeth:
THE GREATNESS OF DAŚAMI
19-21 In the Brahma-vaivarta Purana:`When one scrapes his tongue  with a tooth-twig on Daśamī in order to follow the rules of Dvādaśī, Yama loses hope. Dejected, he destroys the sin that has  been recorded. The sinner who does not eat goes to the abode
of Visnu. To eat in the middle of the day according to the rules  is called"eating oncé', and it should be zealously performed:
DDT: After eating on Daśamī one should clean oneś  teeth with a twig. On Ekādaśī twigs of palāśa (Butea  Frondosa) and other trees are forbidden. As it is said:'On  Ekādaśī one should clean the mouth by only rinsing with  water twelve times:
tato rātrim nayetāñ ca brahmacārī jitendriyah za  bhagavantam smaran bhaktyā bhūmiśāyī sukham svapan
Then at night one should as a brahmacārī, with controlled  senses, remember the Lord with devotion and happily sleep on  the ground.
DDT: As a brahmacārī' means giving up the company of  women, etc. It has already been written that one should  refrain from sex, so here `as a brahmacārí should be understood as not looking at women, and so on. That will be  made clear further on (í3.5z).
RULES FOR THE DAY OF FASTING
prātah snātvārcayitvā ca bhagavantam yathāvidhi 23  tārnra-pātrariv samādāya vrata-samkalpam ācaret
After having bathed in the morning and worshipped the Lord  according to the rules, one should fetch a copper vessel and state  the declaration.
DDT: According to the rules' means as has been explained earlier on in the book (Vilāsas 3-9).
About this Devala says: `Having fetched a copper vessel filled z4  with water, the wise should, facing the north, start the fast or  state the declaration:
DDT: If there is no copper vessel one may simply state  the declaration.
THE MANTRA OF DECLARATION  25 ekādaśyām nirāhārah sthitvāhwm apare 'hani
bhoksyāmi pundarīkāksa śaranam me bhavācyuta
`O lotus-eyed one, I will remain fasting on Ekādaśī and eat on  the next day. O Acyuta, please be my shelter!'
26 uccārayann imam mantram śrīkrsna-caranābjayoh  puspāñjalim samarpyātha mantra-pūtam jalam pibet  Uttering this mantra one should offer a handful of flowers to  the lotus feet of Srī Krsna. Then one should drink the mantraconsecrated water.
27-28 About this Mārkāndeya says: `He who desires the fruit of  the fast should concentratedly drink water consecrated by  muttering the eight-syllabled mantra three times over it. Having worshipped God and offered a handful of flowers, he should  utter the mantra of declaration and announce it to God:
DDT: After worshipping the Lord it is sometimes said  that one should drink to his satisfaction and sometimes  that one should offer a handful of flowers. There is an option between either drinking water or offering flowers  here. In another reading an option between worshipping  and offering flowers is also indicated.
29 daśamyām cārddha-rātropary anuvrttau purah-sarān  ekādaśyāś catur yāmān hitvā sańkalpam ācaret
If Daśamī extends beyond midnight, one should wait until  twelve hours of the Ekādaśī have passed before uttering the  declaration.
30-32 About this is also said: `When midnight is touched by  Daśamī one should give up the first twelve hours of the  Ekādaśī with regard to worship and the declaration: And in  the Nārada Purāna (2.z.t5-2o): `O brāhmana, when there is  the fault of connection with the earlier day, one should avoid  bathing and worship during the first twelve hours of the
Ekādaśī. Afterwards those who fast should bathe, worship  and so on. If the duties of the day are not completed, then the  night is allotted. The duties of the day should be completed at  the beginning of night:
tataś ca bhagavad-bhaktyā paricaryādi-rūpayā 33  dinam rātriñ cagamayed upavāsa paro budhah
Then the intelligent person, devoted to the fast, should spend  the day and night in devotion to the Lord by worship and so  forth.
About this, in the Skanda Purāna: `The intelligent one 34  should, having worshipped the Lord of the god of gods with
the greatest devotion, pass the day and night to attain the fruit  of the fasting.'
DEFINITION OF FASTING
In the Grha-pariśista, Kātyāyana-smrti, Visnu-dharma, Brah- 35  ma-vaivarta Purāna, etc:`To stand fast in the face of sin by cultivating good qualities, and to give up all enjoyment, is called  fasting.'
ENJOYMENT  It is said by Śātātapa: `Perfumes, ornaments, fine clothes, flo- 36-37  wer garlands, ointments, brushing the teeth and cosmetics
pollute one during a fast, and by Srī Vyāsa:`Flowers, ornaments,  fine clothes, sandalwood, incense, ointments, brushing the  teeth and cosmetics defile one during a fast:
DDT: Here he lists the items of enjoyment. `Cosmetics'  means that which actors, etc, use in their eyes. These  things are polluting during a fast and should therefore be  avoided. That is the implied meaning.
In the Kāśi-khanda of the Skanda Purāna it is however said:`Even during a day of fasting brushing the teeth  and cosmetics do not corrupt.` This mainly refers to the
dress of women, where using cosmetics is an integral part. In the same way the other things, such as brushing the teeth, in that verse should be understood as pertaining to women. This has been explained earlier in the book (á.22q-zzó).
SIN 38-39 Srī Sumantu says:`Not observing the rules, not restraining the senses and performing forbidden worship should always be diligently avoided: As said by Śātātapa: `Speaking lies, gambling, sleeping at day and sex: a man devoted to the fast should do none of these during Ekādaśī:
4o-4r And in the Visnu-dharma: `Those who fast and are devoted to the worship of Visnu should not touch heretics or speak with them: In the Srī Visnu Purāna (3.18.97): `Therefore, the disciple should give up speaking with or touching sinful heretics especially at the time of sacrifies, and so on:
42-43 The atonement for that has been mentioned: After seeing such a person the wise should look at the sun: Also, in the Visnu-dharma: After touching, the wise becomes pure after bathing and looking at the sun. After speaking with them, he should think of Acyuta who dwells in purity.'
DDT: It is understood by this that one should avoid even seeing such people.`Who dwells in purity' means that He is situated in pure water or in pure motives.
GOOD QUALITIES
44-45 In the Bhavisya Purāna: `Patience, truthfulness, mercy, silence, purity, control of the senses, worship of the Lord, sacrificial libations, satisfaction and refraining from stealing: this tenfold dharma is common for all vratas.` In the Padma Purāna, in a conversation between Yama and Dhūmraketu: `Having restrained himself on Daśamī, he should pass the day of the vrata with controlled senses, without anger or violence and praising Krsna:
DDT: First he gives the common good qualities and then writes about the special good quality on Ekādaśī with the second quotation. Though one could say that controlling the senses, etc, belong to the common good qualities, it can be said to be special because of the special performer. `Praising Krsná means to perform Krsna-kīrtana. One should pass the day like this. This is the main rule.
In the Visnu-dharmottara: `To utter His mantra, meditate on 46 His mantra, listen to stories about Him, worship Him and to praise and hear His names, etc: these qualities are mentioned
by the thoughtful to be followed during a fast:
DDT:'Etć refers to the different modes of devotion, such as praying.
THE GREATNESS OF THE FAST
It is said in the Visnu-dharma: `The man who fasts and meth- 47 tates with devotion upon Hari, who utters His mantras, who performs His work, whose mind is attached to Him, without desires, without a doubt attains the abode of Brahman, just
like the demon:
DDT:'Without desireś means that he has no desires, or then that even if he has, he becomes desireless. The abode consisting of Brahman is Śrī Vaikuntha. `The demoń is Srī Prahlāda.
OTHER RULES FOR THE DAY OF FASTING
In the Kātyāyana-smrti:'One should fast fully, observing brah- 48-49 macārya: Devala says: `Brahmacārya, non-violence, truthful
ness and vegetarianism: these four should always be practised during vratas:
DDT: Vegetarianism should be practised on the day of fasting and when breaking the fast. Though it was said with the verse 'these eight things do not break a vratá (iz.ioo) that medicine does not break the vrata, medicine
in the form of meat should be avoided. This is also said by  Vyāsa: `One should always avoid meat on the day of fasting and when breaking the fast, even if it is in the form of  medicine:
50-51 And also:`By repeatedly drinking water, by chewing betel once,  by sleeping in the daytime and by sex the fast is destroyed:  Moreover: `By brushing one's teeth, betel, sleeping in the daytime, by sex and by repeatedly drinking water one will not attain the fruit of the fast:
THINGS THAT BREAK BRAHMACARYA  5z About this it has been said:`By looking at women, by touching  them or speaking with them, brahmacārya is destroyed, but  not by timely union with one's wife.`
DDT: Brahmacārya is not destroyed by looking, etc, at  one's own wife, but by intercourse. This is the real meaning.  DUTIES OF THE EVENING
53 tato nityārcannriv krtvā hari ghasrotsavārthikām  krtvā sāyam mahāpūjārń kūryāj jāgaranam niśi
Then, having performed the mandatory service on the festival  on the day of Hari, one should perform great worship in the  evening and then keep vigil at night.
THE WORSHIP
54-59 In the Brahmā Purāna:`Best of seers, one should attentively and  with faith construct an excellent mandala of different flowers  around the Lord: And also (z28.í-5): `One should attentively  fast on Ekādaśī during both fortnights. Having bathed according to the rules one should, dressed in pure clothes and  with controlled senses, correctly with faith and very attentively  worship Visnu with flowers, sandalwood, incense, lights, food
offerings, many other articles - such as uttering mantras, sacrifices, and circumambulations - hymns, different dances,  songs and recitations pleasing to the Lord, stick-like obeisances and loud shouts of`Jaya!". After worshipping like this following the rules, one should keep vigil at night. He who is devoted to Visnu should recite narrations or sing. That man will  go to the supreme dwelling of Visnu. There is no doubt about it:
In the Bhavisya Purāna:`Having worshipped Hari one should 60  pass the night following Ekādaśī as one is able by listening to the  Purānas and so forth:
DESCRIPTION OF THE VIGIL
vaisnavān jāgare 'bhyarccya tīrtham śańkhodakānvitam 61  tebhyo dattvā svayam prāśya vidvān stotrādikam pathet
After worshipping the Vaisnavas during the vigil, the wise should  o$ér them holy water together with water from a conchshell and  then drink it himself. Then he should read hymns and so forth.
purānādi tatah śrutvā gītā-nrtyādika¥ svayam 62  kuryāt paśyec ca pārakya¥ vārayen na hasen na ca
After hearing scriptures such as the Purānas, one should himself sing and dance and also watch others do that. One must  not hinder or laugh at this singing and dancing!
THE PROHIBITION AGAINST  HINDERING SINGING AND SO  FORTH DURING THE VIGIL
In the Padma Purāna: `He who obstructs song or dance during 63-64  the vigil of Hari boils for 60 000 yugas in Raurava and other
hells. He who laughs, etc, at a dancing man during the vigil goes  to hell until fourteen Indras have passed:
THE NECESSITY OF SEEING THE VIGIL
65 In the Skanda Purāna: `Yama presents such a person with hell and great torture. One should not even look at a face that has not seen the vigil:
DDT: It was said that one should`watch others` (í3.6Z). With this and the following verses he shows that seeing the vigil is mandatory. `Presentś means that Yama will take him from his sinful bed and very angrily, with curved eyebrows and with contempt take him away.
66-68 And also: `Those beings who do not see the vigil of Hari will indeed have their eyes ripped out and get kicked in the chest: Furthermore: `Those whose eyes are bright with the fire of Kali never see the vigil of Krsna, and never Janārdana.' Also: `The eyes of men who do not see the vigil are sinful. They are firmly surrounded by the many prominent sins of Kali:
RULES FOR THE VIGIL
69-73 In the Skanda Purāna, a conversation between Brahmā and Nārada (2.4.6.r-5):`Listen Nārada! I will speak about the characteristics of the vigil. Even with only a little knowledge about them, Janārdana is easy to attain. Song, music, dance, reading the Purānas; offering incense, lamps, foodstuffs, flowers, sandalwood-paste, fruits and water; faith, charity, sense-control, truthfulness, refraining from sleep, cheerfulness, observance of the rules, showing astonishment and enthusiasm, refraining from sin and laziness and so forth, performing circumambulations and obeisances, lighting lamps and happiness of mind: O fortunate one, with all these things one should perform ārātrika of Hari every third hour.'
DDT: The words`and so forth' in after`refraining from sin and laziness' refer to gambling, gossiping, etc. The most important quality is happiness of mind. Refraining from sin and laziness are reckoned as two different things,
which brings the list up to 26 different things, as stated in another reading.
And also (2.q.33.í6-z7):`He who performs this vigil on the day of 74-75 Visnu with devotion and without wickedness of mind merges in
the Supersoul. A rich man who however does the vigil deceitfully will himself then be tricked by a vile gambler.'
DDT: The vigil should be done without deceit, as is shown by these two verses first positively and then negatively. `Mergeś means that he attains eternal, close proximity.
In the same book, a conversation between Umā and Maheś- 76-78 vara: `Following the scriptures, refraining from sleep, dancing,
singing, music, clapping of hands, lights, company of saints, offerings of articles, well-known symptoms of devotion, satisfaction, happiness and delighting the people: with these twelve one should diligently perform the vigil dear to Mādhava during both the light and dark fortnight:
Moreover: `Criticising others, having a disturbed mind, 79-8r not following the scriptures, not singing, not lighting lamps,
not offering articles even though able to do so, indifference and sleeping: a vigil with these nine qualities suitable for Kali is particularly low' And also: `Instead of speaking one should sing and dance. O Durgā, when speaking, one should read the Purānas:
THE MANDATORINESS OF THE VIGIL
In the Skanda Purāna, a conversation between Brahmā and 82-84 Nārada (7.4.28.47-49): `If someone does not keep vigil on the
day of Visnu, then his previous and coming relatives will be cast down. By non-performance he destroys his sons, merit and wealth. A residence in hell is created for him with his ancestors for a long time. O best of brāhmanas, this sin will not be destroyed by atonement, vratas or deep meditation without the vigil on Dvādaśī:
DDT: Since the vigil is necessary for even destroying sin,  its mandatoriness is proven.
85-86 In the same book, a conversation between Umā and Maheśvara:` The fortune of one who does not keep vigil on the day of  Visnu is destroyed just like by insulting Vaisnavas. He will not  have any interest in the vigil of Dvādaśī, and he will not have  eligibility for worshipping Keśava:
87 In the same book Brahmā says: `In whose heart Hari, the  Lord of yoga, always resides, in him interest in the vigil on Dvādaśī is born:
MANDATORINESS OF  SINGING, ETC, DURING THE VIGIL  88 sāmānyena purālekhi gīta-vādyādi-nityatā
adhunā likhyate so yam jāgare ca viśesatah
Previously the mandatoriness of singing, dancing and so on  was discussed in a general sense. Now this will be described in  connection with the vigil.
DDT: In connection with the vigil he now again writes  about the mandatoriness of song, dance and so on, a  mandatoriness he has already established with regard to  the daily duties (8.z5í-a95). Fearing the fault of repetition, he writes this verse. The intended meaning is that  one should certainly sing, dance and so on during the  vigil. And so on' refers to uttering hymns, etc.
89-9o In the Skanda Purāna, a conversation between Umā and Maheśvara: `He who like a dumb person does not read or sing on the  vigil of Hari will be born into dumbness in seven births. O  Pārvatī, the fool who does not dance during the vigil of Hari  will be born into lameness in seven births:
91-92 In the Padma Purāna, in connection with the Paksavardhinī-vrata: `Those people who do not praise or appreciate the  vigil of Hari will have no festivals in their houses during seven
births. Those who praise and extol the vigil of the Carrier of  the disk will have a continous festival for fifteen births!'
THE GREATNESS OF THE VIGIL
In the Skanda Purāna, a conversation between Brahmā and 93-94  Nārada, and in the Prahlāda-samhitā:'The ancestors will not
attain liberation by offerings at Gayā, nor by sacrifices at many  holy places without the vigil on Dvādaśī. In whatever situation, one who performs the vigil of Hari on Dvādaśī with every  three hours burns sins from a thousand lives.
`O brāhmana, one who offers a lamp during the vigil of the 95-98  night of Hari attains the fruit of giving away a hundred cows
with every blink of the eye. One who performs worship of  Hari with flowers during the vigil of Dvādaśī attains the fruit  of a horse-sacrifice with every flower. One who burns aloe-incense after worshipping Visnu during the vigil attains the fruit  of giving away a hundred plates of sesame-seeds with each half  of an eyeblink. O twice-born one, one who burns bdellium-incense with ghee for just a moment during the vigil of Hari attains the fruit one would normally attain after a whole month.
DDT: After a whole month' means that burning bdellium  with ghee during the vigil gives the same fruit as burning  it during a whole month otherwise. Another reading of  the text has'the fruit of the month of Māghá meaning the  fruit one attains by bathing, etc, during that month.
`One who offers Visnu food made of havisya during the vigil 99-101  attains the merit of offering a mountain of rice. One who offers
cooked preparations and different fruits during the vigil of  Padmanābha again attains the fruit of giving away ten thousand cows. One who offers betel with camphor during the vigil  as a gift to Padmanābha will live in Śvetadvīpa for a long time.
`One who constructs a flower mandala during the vigil of 102-104  Padmanābha will sport with flower airplanes in the abode of
Brahmā. One who burns aguru with camphor on the vigil of
Padmanābha burns sins from a hundred thousand lives. O twiceborn one, one who bathes Krsna with yoghurt, milk, ghee and so  on during the night of the vigil will indeed partake of liberation.
105-108 `One who offers divine garments on the vigil will be splendid for as many manvantaras as there are threads in the cloth.  One who offers Visnu ornaments made of gold and jewels will  live with me for seven kalpas. He is certainly dear to me. O  best of sages, one who, in the age of Kali, offers pure sandalwood, camphor, aloe and keśara together with musk on the vigil  of Hari without a doubt attains the fruit of a horse-sacriñce  for each one by the mercy of Vāsudeva.
109-113 `One who burns a lamp with excellent ghee before Visnu  on the night of the vigil achieves the fruit of donating ten  thousand cows in a moment. One who burns a camphor-lamp  on the vigil of Vāsudeva attains the fruit of donating ten million brown cows. One who performs ārātrika with camphor  on the vigil gains liberation together with ten thousand relatives. On the vigil of Hari even ārātrika without camphor or  the donation of a poor man will give a great fruit. One who  bathes the head of Hari with water in a conch-shell will carry  on his head the fruit of bathing in the Gangā.
114-116 After worshipping Hari during the vigil, one who is already clean should read the Visnu-sahasra-nāma, the Gītā, the  liberation of the elephant, the auspicious bathing and Vedic  chants again and again with devotion. By reading during the  vigil before Hari, the form of sacriñce, one attains the merit of  donating a hundred red cows for every syllable.
117-119 `Then again, the merit of one who sings, dances and plays  music cannot be attained through a hundred sacrifices or a  hundred vratas or donations. He who sings and dances even  though shy will achieve the fruit of the dharma of the four  āśramas. On the vigil of Padmanābha one should read from a  book. One will stay in heaven near Visnu for as many yugas as  there were ślokas in the book.
120-122 `One who decorates the altar with beautiful banana-trunks  and mango-leaves on the vigil of the Cakra-bearer will have a
festival in heaven for as many yugas as there were leaves. He  will be worshipped by Indra and others, and surrounded by  apsarās he will enjoy. If some of those who dance on the vigil  go to hell, they will be freed by Dharmarāja and then proceed  to the feet of Hari, to liberation.
`The lord of Ramā is pleased by the sound of singing on the 123-125  vigil. He will bestow happiness superior to that enjoyed by
Indra during a hundred manvantaras. By dancing on the vigil  one attains happiness on earth, in heaven and also in Rasātala.  By dancing one attains liberation! The merit one attains by  offering something wonderful is said by the wise not to be attainable by ten million sacriñces, yoga or samkhya.
DDT: `Yogá means the eightfold system. `Samkhyá  means knowledge of the self.
`One who puts a row of lamps before the Lord on the vigil will 126-129  stay in heaven until the end of the kalpa together with ten mil
lion airplanes. One who during the night of the Lord hears the  narration of Rāmacandra, as told by Vālmīki, for him even  Vaikuntha is not sufficient. Then again, one who reads narrations from the Mahābhārata on the vigil will stay in heaven together with ten million relatives. The sins of ten million births  are destroyed for one who reads the story of the great soul  Dhruva, son of Uttānapāda, or the story of Krsna's childhood.  `Therefore, one should recite the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam with 130-133
devotion near the Lord on the vigil of both the light and dark  fortnights. He who reads thus on the vigil, goes to His abode  with all his family. The eighteen Purānas are always dear to  Visnu, the oldest one, but especially so on the vigil. One who  reads the Gītā during the vigil, or the Thousand Names of  Visnu, will attain the merit of reciting all the Purānas or the  Vedas.
`One who donates a cow on the vigil of the Cakra-bearer 134-I37  will without a doubt attain the fruit of giving away the seven
isles. One who constructs a beautiful pavillion on the vigil of  Padmanābha will stay in the world of Dhruva until the end of
Brahmā's life. O brāhmana, the greatest merit of all merit on  earth is available within the three worlds on the vigil of Dvādaśī. They who intend to perform the vigil with deeds, minds  and words will never return from the world of Visnu.
138-139 `When He has seen someone dance on the vigil of Dvādaśī,  Krsna washes away the sin accrued to that person during a  yuga. One who inspires people and then himself performs the  vigil will attain mastery of the world like the Bhārata of yore.
140-144 `O brāhmana, it is certainly known that many persons  previously attained liberation by satisfying Visnu on the  vigil, just like a dog-eater once did by singing. Dilīpa became  a king by dancing on the vigil of Hari, Nahusa by giving  arghya. Srñjaya attained lordship and freedom from enemies  by staying up during the night of Vañjulī-dvādaśī and donating fruits. Best of seers, Nābhāga became a king by the mercy  of Mādhava after donating a cloth on the vigil of Visnu. A  prostitute became perfected and known as Menakā in heaven by dancing on the vigil of Trisprśā-dvādaśī. O brāhmana,  what I tell you is true!
DDT: The brāhmana addressed is Vyāsa both in the  Skanda Purāna and in the Prahlāda-samhitā. In the latter  work this is a~conversation between Prahlāda and Vyāsa.
145-148 `By keeping vigil within a forest of tulasī-bushes during the  night of the Cakra-bearer, Alarka became master of the earth,  glory and fame. This king enjoyed on earth in days of yore during six and sixty thousand years. By cleaning and constructing  a mandala before Vāsudeva during Ekādaśī on both the light  and dark fortnights, Sāndilī became perfected. By lighting a  divine lamp on the vigil of Unmīlanī-dvādaśī, Indradyumna  attained kingship.
149-150 `Purūravās became master of everything - something difficult to attain even by the gods - by playing on the vīnā during  the day of Dolayātrā. Kukutstha honoured those performing  the vigil at night and achieved the kingship, difficult to obtain,  through his own power and gifts.
A dog-eater by the name Mrgī sang on the night of Hari. 151-153  Because of the vigil she became the queen of all ladies in the
world of Gāndharvas. Since he previously played the flute  before Visnu on the night of Vijayā-ekādaśī, Rcīka will become a king. O brāhmana, any singer, musician or dancer who  performs the vigil will go to heaven together with dancing  girls!
DDT: Instead of`played the fiuté one reading says'by auspicious prayerś, meaning prayers like the one beginning  with `Glory to the Abode of men!' (Śrīmad Bhāgavatam  io.9o.q8~.
`Best of seers, all those born in fallen families can become rul- 154-155  ers of the earth and fulñll all their desires by keeping vigil on
the day of Hari, and if they have no desires, then even dog-eaters can attain liberation through the vigil. With regard to those  keeping the vigil there is no need to speak about caste.
`In the age of Kali meditation does not purify, nor do the 156-157  waters of the Jāhnavī. Japa does not purify in Kali, only the
vigil of Hari! Without the vigil of Dvādaśī the fruit of the  stages of life or of being a brāhmana can not be attained even  by fully satisfying sacrifices.
`Laksmī turns away from those who do not keep the vigil, 158-161  as do the Vasus and gods, the forefathers who eat kavya-offer
ings, the humans and Sanaka and the seers. Even one offspring  - what to speak of several - can deliver all his forefathers by  keeping vigil on Dvādaśī. One who keeps a good vigil on the  thornless day of Visnu indeed sings together with the knowers  of Brahman in the world of the Lord. To one with whose conduct the Lord is pleased a son is born, and even one son can  save all forefathers in hell.
`No worshipper of Sūrya, Siva, Brahmā, Śakti or any other 162-163  divinity is equal to the Bhāgavata! Even if he lives at home, if
this auspicious narration of Dvādaśī always dwells in his mind,  he will attain the fruit of the four goals of life:
DDT: Now he begins writing about the fruit of reading  the greatness of the vigil. `The fruit of the four goals of  life' is devotion, the fruit of religiosity, wealth, enjoyment  and liberation.
THE FRUIT OF THE  GREATNESS OF THE VIGIL
164-166 In the same book: `The fruit one attains by fasting on the day  of Hari during a hundred years one attains by reading about  the greatness of the vigil. Son, one who reads with devotion  this greatness of the vigil of Dvādaśī that I have spoken will  save his relatives. One who, in the age of Kali, on the vigil of  Dvādaśī reads the story about the childhood pastimes of the  son of Devakī in Mathurā, will live in Vaikuntha for ten thousand times ten million years, surrounded by his forefathers.
DDT: This statement about reading something else is  given as an example or because it is connected with the  subject.
167-170 `The greatness of the vigil of Hari on Vañjulī-dvādaśī should  always be sung! I will now describe the merit. O seer, the merit  one attains by performing ten times ten days of Visnu, one  immediately attains by reading this glorification. By performing sacrifices during ten million births, men do not attain liberation, but by reading about the vigil they do. One who reads  the greatness of the vigil of Visnu on Dvādaśī is freed from all  sins and attains the abode of Visnu. So also all rascals, for He  always takes hold of them and makes them gentle:
THE FAULT OF NOT  PERFORMING THE VIGIL
171-172 In the Skanda Purāna, in a conversation between Umā and  Maheśvara (x.5.23.8-4.2): `Those who sleep on the day of the  killer of Madhu are bitten by the serpent of Kali. Those who  do not perform the vigil are bound by the web of māyā. Those
who do not perform the vigil on Ekādaśī in the age of Kali are  ruined. There is no doubt about it. Therefore their lives are  unsure.
`O Gaurī, the merit of a thousand horse-sacrifices and ten 173-177  thousand times ten million Vājapeya-offerings is not equal to
that of the vigil of Visnu. Beautiful one, when the vigil of Hari  has been performed, the family of the father, mother and wife  is promoted. When people perform the vigil on the pure day  of Visnu, Hari becomes delighted and dances amongst them!  For as many days as one performs the vigil of Hari in front of  Keśava, so many tens of thousands of yugas one will stay in the  abode of Visnu. However, for as many days as one does not  perform the vigil, the servants of Yama will dance in one's house  with raised weapons.
`One who reads the Purānas on the vigil of Vāsudeva will 178-181  attain his desired goals. He will not become a ghost. One who
again sings and dances on the vigil of Hari attains the abode of  Brahmā, my abode and indeed that of Visnu. Furthermore, the  Vaisnava who illuminates the directions on the vigil of Visnu  will dwell in Vaikuntha forever with his ancestors. The man  who puts his mind to the vigil of Hari will dwell in Svetadvīpa  for sixty thousand years.
`Pārvatī! Whatever sins people commit in ten million lives, 182-184  all those are burnt on the vigil of Krsna. Those who perform
the vigil in front of a Sālagrāma-stone will attain the fruit of  ten million Cāndrāyana-sacrifices with every three hours. One  cannot attain enjoyment, wealth, sons, fame or an eternal  abode by ten thousand sacrifices without the vigil on Dvādaśī.
`Every step a pilgrim takes towards the temple of Keśava on 185-188  the vigil equals a horse-sacriñ_ce! The wanderer will stay in
heaven for as many thousands of years as the times he bows  down to the earth on the vigil. Therefore, in the age of Kali, in  order to destroy sin, one should leave his house on the vigil of  the twelve Dvādaśīs and go to a temple of Mādhava. What is  the use of many strict vratas or living in a holy place if one does  not peform the vigil when the day of Dvādaśī comes?
189-191 'Pārvatī, one who does not give up the vigil of Vāsudeva even  when depressed is most dear to me. Then again, I have no need  for one who is of a healthy mind and who stays at home but  does not perform the vigil of Hari. If a devotee of mine, deluded by sin, does not perform the vigil of Hari, then his worship is useless. He does not really worship me.
192 'Dancing on the night of the vigil of Visnu liberates a body  clad internally and externally with ten million sins.
DDT: 'Internally' means the senses, and 'externally' the  limbs of the body.
I93-I94 `Now that the terrible age of Kali has come, the people who  perform the faultless vigil of Visnu are equal to the thirty gods.  One who performs the vigil on a pure Dvādaśī of Visnu gives  an elbow to Yama and his messengers!
195-197 'Dear one, those who construct a flower pavillion on the  vigil of Visnu on Dvādaśī will attain the fruit of a horse-sacrifice for each flower! Hari will award His own abode to those  who build a house, splendid with banana-trunks, for Krsna on  Dvādaśī. Gaurī, those who give away lamps on the vigil of  Keśava will be rid of darkness and proceed to the highest  abode of Visnu.
198-199 'Brāhmanas, ksatriyas, vaiśyas, women, śūdras, those from  mixed castes or even lower, rāksasas, daityas and dānavas: all  these can attain the highest destination by performing the vigil  of Visnu. If a man by his own will sings or dances with devotion  on the vigil of Padmanābha, what more is there for him to do?
2oo-2o4 `O Devī, one who dances ecstatically and claps his hands,  sings and sees many festivals before Vāsudeva during the vigil  at night, recites narrations about Krsna, decorates the Vaisnavas, plays music, watches many different kinds of dancing  with his hair on ends and gives pleasing speeches, will by these  activities attain the merit of ten million holy places with every  passing moment! And also, one who offers Hari incense with  an undisturbed mind during the vigil will become ruler of the  seven isles:
DDT: Now, in the following seven verses he explains  where one should perform the vigil if the best place is not  available.
Furthermore:`In the absence of a temple of Krsna one should 205-211  go to one of my temples, auspicious one, and perform the vigil
at night there. Know me to be dear to Mādhava! If there is no  such temple, one should go to a temple of Ravi, the sun-god,  and keep vigil there. What Visnu is, that Ravi is also. O Goddess, in the absence of that and if one is outside a town and in a  forest during the Ekādaśī, then the three steps of Visnu are  there in the sky. Otherwise Visnu is lightning or the Śālagrāma-stone. In front of these one can perform the vigil. The  three steps of Visnu are also in a cloud-covered sky. O Gaurī, if  one can not see that, one should do the vigil under a bodhitree, at the root of a myrobalan tree, in a forest of tulasī-plants,  in any holy place or in the waters of a river. In the absence of all  this, Mahādevī, those who are fixed in devotion should mentally perform the vigil in the house of a Vaisnava.
`O Gaurī, without the vigil the day of Visnu will be fruit- 212-214  less. It will not please us nor the gods, headed by Brahmā. Of
all sacrifices, the vigil on the day of Vāsudeva is called the great  sacrifice. Therefore, one should perform the vigil and give up  other duties!'
In the Padma Purāna, in a conversation between the mes- 215-216  senger of the gods and Vikundala:`O vaiśya, one who performs
the vigil at night fully worships Janārdana. Ten of his ancestors  on the side of his father, mother and wife will certainly be promoted: In the Mārkāndeya Purāna:'O king, it is said that one  who does not know meditation or the object of meditation,  has no understanding and whose conduct is fallen, will be liberated on the vigil of Hari:
In the Prahlāda-sarühitā, Prahlāda says:'A11 sins, even that 217-219  of killing a brāhmana, will be destroyed bit by bit on the vigil
of Krsna. O beloved of Krsna, separately or all together, other  things are simply a waste of time, but the wise say that one vigil  of the God of gods is not equal to this, it is superior. Brahmā,
Rudra, Indra and the gods always congregate on the vigil dear to Krsna!
22o-225 . .`The seers such as Nārada, the wise men headed by Vyāsa and I all go there, for we are always fond of worshipping Krsna. Kāśī, Puskara, Prayāga, Naimisāranya, Gayā, the great Sālagrāma-ksetra, Arbudāranya, the most holy Mathurā, all other holy places, the sacrifices and the four Uedas all move towards the the vigil of Hari. Best of the twiceborn! Gañgā, Sarasvatī, Revā, Yamunā, Satadrū, Candrabhāgā, Vitastā, all other rivers, all pools, lakes and oceans flow in the direction of the vigil of Krsna on Ekādaśī. Indeed, the gods envy men who dance, sing and play ecstatically on the vīnā on Krsna's vigil!'
226 janmāstamī-prabodhanyādike 'nyac ca mahotsave māhātmyam jāgarasyāgre lekhyam tat-tat-prasańgatah
The greatness of the vigil on other days, such as Janmāstamī and Prabodhanī, will be described further on in the book in connection with the specific festival.
227 tatah prabhāte bhagavad- rātri-krīda-rasātmikām kauśikīrri pramudāgāyec chrī-krsna-paritosanīm
Then, at sunrise, to fully please Śrī Krsna, one should joyfully sing songs of the Kauśikī-type, full of the rasa of the Lord's pastimes at night.
DDT: Kauśikī is a special kind of song which is mainly based on the rasa of amorous love, such as the song beginning with `Bloodshot from a sleepless night of passion...' in the Gīta-govinda (8.2). Singing such songs will fully please Śrī Krsna, the crest jewel of rasikas.
228 As said in the Skanda Purāna: `One who sings Kauśikī songs at sunrise of the vigil of Hari elevates all dog-eaters so that they become like brāhmanas:
RULES FOR THE DAY OF BREAKING THE FAST
mañgalārātrika¥ krtvābhyarcya prasthāpya vaisnavān 229 prātah pūjañ ca nispādya krsne tat sarvam arpayet
After one has offered the early morning ārātrika, honoured and then sent away the Vaisnavas, one should perform the morning worship. Then everything should be dedicated to Krsna.
DDT:`Honoured' means having given presents of offered foodstuffs and so on.
As it is said by Kātyāyana:`Having bathed in the morning one 23o should worship Hari and then dedicate the fast. Then, in order
to bring the vrata to its completion, one should break the fast: THE MANTRA OF DEDICATION ajñāna-timirāndhasya vratenānena keśava 231
prasīda sumukho nātha jñāna-drsti prado bhava
`Keśava! By this vrata, please be happy with this person who is blinded by the darkness of ignorance. O Master, turn Your face towards me, and give me the eyesight of knowledge!'
tatra snānopacaran to prātar naiva samācaret 232 pramānikānā¥ kesāñcid vaisnavānām idam matam
In this morning worship one should not offer the article of bathing. This ís the opinion of some authoritative Vaisnavas. DDT:`Thiś means on Dvādaśī. With the statement that
this is the opinion of Vaisnavas authoritative with regard to worship - for example Śrī Krsnadevācārya - he means that their opinion should be followed. With`some` all are actually indicated, since one can see that Srīvaisnavas and others follow such a practice. In the following verses he will establish this opinion.
233 In the Padma Purāna, Vratakhanda: ' Whatever good deeds  one may have performed since birth are destroyed on the day  of Dvādaśī by transgressing offered flowers.'
DDT: `Transgressing offered flowers' means to disrespect  them by removing them. It does not mean to step over  them, for that is always forbidden in the worship of any  divinity. In that case the words'Hari' and`Dvādaśi would  lose all meaning. This prohibition will be repeated further on (13.26o). Amongst the prohibitions on Dvādaśī it  is said that Visnu should not be bathed during the day.
234 In the Trailokya-mohana-pañcarātra: A Vaisnava should not  bathe b-Iari on the day of Dvādaśī, otherwise the fruit of all his  fortnightly duties will go to the demon Vāskala:
235 ato divā-nisiddhatvād rajanyā¥ snāpayet prabhum  pavitra-damana-dvādaśy- utsave tu na niśy api
Because of this prohibition, one should bathe the Lord at night.  However, on the festivals of Pavitrāropana- and Damanāropana-dvādaśī, one should not even bathe at night.
236 nityakrtya¥ samāpyātha śaktyā viprārivś ca bhojayet  kurvīta dvādaśī-madhye tulasī¥ prāśya pāranam
After finishing one's mandatory duties one should feed the  twiceborn according to capacity. Then, in the middle of Dvādaśī, one should eat tulasī and break the fast.
DDT: Mandatory duties refer to the Vaiśvadevata-ritual,  japa and such things. Even though in verses such as A bit  of food with tulasī...' (9.393) food with tulasī is always  enjoined, it is especially necessary when breaking the fast.
237 As it is said in the Skanda Purāna:`One who has fasted should  eat food with tulasī on the day of Dvādaśī. It will destroy ten  millions of sins!'
CONSIDERING DVADAŚI  IN BREAKING THE FAST
It is said in the Padma Purāna:`When men transgress Dvādaśī 238  ít becomes very detrimental. It will remove dharma, as when
one does not bathe in the Sarasvatī:
DDT:'Transgresś means when one does not break the  fast within it. As when one does not bathe in the  Sarasvati' has the following meaning: when bathing at the  confluence of the Gańgā, Yamunā and Sarasvatī, one  should cross over the Gańgā and Yamunā and bathe on  the other side, since one should according to the rules  first bathe in Sarasvatī and then in the others. One who  does not follow this rule transgresses Sarasvatī and she  will thus take away that personś dharma.
In the Skanda Purāna:'One who transgresses Dvādaśī when 239-241  the day of breaking the fast has arrived and eats on Trayodaśī,
will take one hundred births in hell.' In the same book, in a  conversation between Mārkāndeya and Bhāgiratha (2.5.6.41):  `The devotee who does not complete the Dvādaśī throws his  earlier merit into the fire because of this: In the Kūrma Purāna: `One should fast on Ekādaśī and break the fast on Dvādaśī. One should not do that on Trayodaśī, since it would destroy the merit of twelve Dvādaśīs:
Furthermore:'One should not overstep Dvādaśī even by two 242-245  or three moments, for when overstepped, Dvādaśī will take away
onés earlier merit: In the Bhavisya Purāna:`Whatever done during twelve years is certainly immediately destroyed for the man  who breaks his fast after Dvādaśī: In the Devī-rahasya:'If one  oversteps Dvādaśī and then breaks the fast, then one's bathing  and so forth will all become fruitless. If Dvādaśī is short one  should perform one's mandatory duties at sunrise, or if very  short, after midnight but before midday.'
PERFORMING ONE S DUTIES
WHEN DVADAŚI IS SHORT  246-249 In the Bhavisya Purāna: `O king, if Dvādaśī is very short one  should perform his duties - such as bathing, worship, giving  charity and performing sacrifices - at sunrise: In the Padma  Purāna (6.37.85):`If Dvādaśī is very short on a day of breaking  a fast, one should perform both the morning and midday duties at sunrise: Also, in the Nārada Purāna (Z.Z.Zi):`Best of the  twiceborn, when Dvādaśī is very short one should perform  duties such as bathing, worship, giving charity and performing  sacrifices at sunrise: Devala and the Sārada Purāna say: `The  daily duties should all be done during the day, but if one is not  able to complete them, they may be done at night:
BREAKING THE FAST IF
THERE IS VERY LITTLE TIME  25o-251 In the Skanda Purāna:`On the order of Sambhu, if one notices  that the Dvādaśī lasts even half a moment after midnight, one  should quickly perform all his duties up to midday. If the Dvādaśī is so short that one does not have time to break the fast,  one should drink water. This is considered both eating and  not-eating by the wise:
DDT: Since drinking water is not considered eating by  the wise, one can eat later and avoid the fault of eating  twice. Also, since it is considered eating, one avoids the  fault of transgressing the Dvādaśī.
252-256 Furthermore:`If one notices that the Dvādaśī will last only two  or three moments after sunrise, one should perform duties such  as bathing and worship during the night: In the Kālikā- and  Sārada Purānas:`O king, when Dvādaśī is very short one should  perform duties such as bathing, giving in charity and performing sacrifices at night. How is one to break the fast if there is  very little time? By water, then there will be no fault of eating
twice: Kātyāyana says:`One performing a vrata without eating  should chant a mantra to Hari and then break the fast with  water if there is a risk for the proper time to pass: And also:  `Sandhya and such things are mandatory duties, breaking the  fast occasional. One should break the fast with water and then  perform sandhya, etc:
PROHIBITION AGAINST  BREAKING THE FAST ON HARI-VASARA  dvādaśi pūrva pādīyas tatra ced dhari-vāsarah 257  dvādaśyādhikyatas tisthet pārana¥ tatra nācaret
The first quarter of Dvādaśī is Hari-vāsara. If Dvādaśī is of  great length one should not break the fast during this time.  DDT:`Of great length' means continuing at least 18 hours
after sunrise. In that case one should not break the fast  during Hari-vāsara.
In the Vísnu-dharmottara:`The first quarter of Dvādaśī is called 258-259  Hari-vāsara. Those devoted to Visnu wait until it has passed
before breaking the fast: And also:`The link between Ekādaśī  and Dvādaśī is known as Hari-vāsara, and it consists of the  last quarter of Ekādaśī and the first of Dvādaśī. During this  time one should not eat:
OTHER RULES FOR DVĀDAŚI
In the Skanda Purāna:`Honey, meat, wine, oil, exertion, anger, 260-262  sex, eating other peopleś food, brass utensils, betel nut, greed
and transgressing offered flowers: a Vaisnava should avoid these  twelve on Dvādaśī: In the Brahmānda Purāna:`Brass utensils,  meat, wine, honey, speaking lies, exertion, travelling, sleeping  in the daytime, ornaments, stone-ground substances and masura-beans: a Vaisnava should always avoid these twelve on Dvādaśī and he will be freed from all sins:
263-264 Brhaspati says:'Brass utensils, meat, wine, gambling, exertion, anger, sex, violence, untruth, greed, oil and transgressing  offered flowers: these twelve a Vaisnava should avoid on Dvādaśī: And also:`Brass utensils, meat, masura-beans, chickpeas,  kodrava, sex, medicine and other people's food: these eight  should be avoided on Dvādaśī:
MAHA-DVADAŚI  265-266 In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna, in a conversation between  Sūta and Saunaka: `Unmīlanī, Vañjulī, Trisprśā, Paksavardhinī, Jayā, Vijayā, Jayatī and Pāpanāśinī: these eight Dvādaśīs  are very auspicious. O twice-born one, they remove all sin! The  first four are connected with a particular tithi and the others  with a particular star. They forcefully terminate sin:  (267-28I)
MANDATORINESS OF MAHA-DVADAŚI
282-283 In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna: 'These eight Dvādaśīs have  been described by those learned in the Purānas. If one of them  is transgressed, they will destroy all one's merit: In the Padmaand Mārkāndeya Purānas the blessed Lord says: `Those who  do not perform the eight Dvādaśīs in this world will stay in  Yamaś abode until the end of the universe:
284-285 In the Skanda Purāna, in a conversation between Brahmā  and Nārada, in connection with the vigil: `One who neglects  Unmīlanī, Vañjulī or Paksavardhinī will stay in hell until fourteen Indras have passed. One who on earth does not perform  Trisprśā, dear to Visnu, will dwell in Yama's abode until the rivers have flowed into the oceans:
DDT: By connection with Unmīlanī and the others  mentioned in the Skanda Purāna, the quartet of Jayā and  so forth is also shown to be mandatory. Or then, within  these eight the four beginning with Unmīlanī are shown  since they are predominating. They are indeed manda(286-292) tory. This is the conclusion.
UNMĪLANI-VRATA  The following is from the Padma Purāna.`Śrī Sūta said: In days 293-294  of yore Ambarīsa ruled the earth. Once the great seer Gautama,
best of all ascetics, arrived in his court. Seeing him, the king got  up from his throne, offered him gifts and made him sit on the  trone. With great devotion he then spoke to him.
`Srī Ambarīsa said:"Welcome, tiger amongst sages! Please 295-296  be merciful! Now that you have come to my house I am most
fortunate. Is your penance going well nowadays? Is your devotion to Srī Keśava steady, not slipping out of your heart, o tiger  amongst sages?"
`Srī Gautama replied: "My practice is going well, o king, 297-3oI  and my devotion to Krsna is most steady. Best of kings, you al
ways protect the brāhmanas. Are you well? O lord of men,  what kind of devotional service to the Lord are you engaged  in? Do you daily see the Lord as a Sālagrāma? Do you always  praise the water that has bathed the Śālagrāma stone? Do you  daily take some of the bathing-water and drink it? Do you give  some to the Vaisnavas and then sprinkle the house with the  rest? Do you smear your limbs with the remains of the oil that  has been rubbed on the Śālagrāma? Do you every day touch a  garland of Sālagrāma-stones to your head and then wear it  around your neck with great devotion?
"'O lord of the earth, do you honour the remains of Krsnaś 302-304  incense with devotion? O king, do you perform ārātrika to
Visnu and then pray with devotion? Do you devotedly carry  the conch-water offered to Hari on your head? Do you always  touch offered items to your head and then give them to the  Vaisnavas? Do you present the food - with all kinds of ingredients - which the Lord of lords has tasted to Visvaksena and  then enjoy it together with the Vaisnavas?
"'Do you always devotedly praise Janārdana with the 305-309  Thousand Names? Do you offer the Lord valuable incense and
sing and dance? Do you adore Madhusūdana with durva-grass  at the beginning of worship? O tiger amongst men, do you
offer aksata to Keśava? Best of men, do you every fortnight perform the Dvādaśī-vrata that is pure together with the vigil? Do  you constantly worship Hari with great amounts of tulasī  leaves? Do you wear tilaka made of gopīcandana on your body?  Do you at all times carry a garland made of myrobalan fruits  around your neck, and a garland made of tulasī leaves, equal to  ten thousand sacrifices?
310-311 "`O king, do you always worship the Sālagrāma stone together with one from Dvāraka, one that bestows pleasure and  liberation? Lord of the earth, do you recite the Bhāgavata Purāna in front of Hari, and the story of Prahlāda and the king of  demons?
312-314 "`Master of the earth, do you seeing through the eyes of  scripture always diligently restrain men from performing a  mixed day of Vāsudeva? In a land where mixed days of Visnu  are being performed, the king is attacked by sin and becomes  eligible for hell. One should give up the four types of mixed  days of Hari and celebrate the pure ones. They will liberate ten  million relatives from hell and lead them to heaven:'
315-317 Ambarīsa said: "Best of brāhmanas, everything that you  have mentioned I do. I see this whole world, moving and nonmoving beings, as consisting of Visnu. Best of seers, you, the  embodied Visnu, have now come to my home. Please describe  to me, o brāhmana, a Vaisnava vrata that fulfills all desires. O  best of seers, one which, when performed, leaves nothing else  to be done, and which ensures that one will never return from  the world of Visnu!"'
318-32o And then (6.35.29-68): `Srī Gautama said: "Hear, lord of  the earth! I will describe a great Vaisnava vrata to you. The  merit that is born from this Dvādaśī I have not told anyone. O  great king, you are a Vaisnava. Hear with devotion the Vaisnava vrata which is most secret amongst men devoted to the  Lord. It is called Unmīlanī. Previously Visnu, being pleased,  mercifully explained it to me. Now, king, I will pass it on to you.
321-329 "`When a pure Ekādaśī lasts beyond sunrise the next day,  that second day is called Unmīlanī. It certainly destroys heaps
of sin. Whatever merit is connected with all holy places and  sanctuaries in the three worlds, sacrifices, Vedas and austerities is not equal to even a minute fraction of it. I have neither  heard of nor seen anything equal to Unmīlanī. Prayāga is not  equal to it, nor Kuruksetra, Kāśī, Mathurā, Puskara; rivers  Revā, Sarasvatī and Kalindī; the fields of Pindāraka, Prabhāsa,  Harakeśvara; the mountains of Himālaya, Meru, Gandhamādana, Malaya, Vindhya, Naisadha; rivers Godavari, Kaverī,  Candrabhāgā, Devikā, Tāpī, Payosnī, Siprā, Candanā, Carmanvatī, Sarayū, Gandakī, Gomati, Vipāśā nor the great Sona. O  king, what is the use of more words? There is no God higher  than Keśava, and nothing equal to Unmīlanī. All the sins of  those who observe Unmīlanī and worship Keśava are thrown  into the fire.
"`Lord of the earth, according to the rules one should wor- 330  ship Govinda with the name of the month in which the Unmīlanī tithi falls.
DDT: After describing its greatness he now speaks about  the worship from this verse up to verse 351.`The name of  the month': The twelve months, beginning with Mārga,  have names of Visnu connected with them, beginning  with Keśava and ending with Dāmodara. The corresponding name should be used, and also the form with its  respective placement of weapons.
"`One should fashion a golden form of Mādhava with the 331  name of the month and then worship Viśvarūpa with faith
and devotion according to one's means.
DDT: `Viśvarūpa' means He whose form is entirely  lovely, or then it means that one should worship the Lord  together with his limbs and weapons.
"`One should also establish a kumbha: a pot decorated with san- 332-334  dalwood paste, flowers and aksata and a tie of a garland, with
pure water and a little gold, a diamond, a sapphire, a ruby and a  pearl inside. On top of it a copper vessel filled with wheat or rice  should be placed. Govinda should be established on this kum
bha, and be bathed together with saffron, aloe and sandalwood.  Then one should smear Visnu with fragrant oil.
DDT: The idea is that one should establish a kumbha and  then.bathe the Lord upon it with milk, yoghurt, ghee, honey, sugarwater, and so on. The mantra for installation is:
ehy ehi tva¥ jagannātha vaikuntha purusottama  parivāraganopeta laksmyā saha jagatpate
`Come, come, Master of the universe, o Penetrating one,  Supreme person, together with your associates and with  Laksmi, o Lord of the world!'
The Lord should be called with this and then installed  with the mantra beginning with 'mano jūtir'. One should  offer sandalwood, flowers and so on with a mantra consisting of the particular name of the Visnu being worshipped.
335-338 "`O seer amongst kings, one should then offer two garments, a  sacred thread and an upper garment, shoes and a canopy above  the head. One should then, in order to please Mādhava, give  away nice waterpots, grains, sesame, silver, cloth, sweet rice and  flour. Having offered Mādhava a couch with all utensils, Vaisnavas should with great devotion worship the worshipable one  with incense, lamps, food, fruits, leaves, tulasī leaves and seasonal flowers.
339-34I "'The following mantras should be used: The name of the  month for the feet, Viśvarūpine namah (obeisance to Him who  embodies all) for the knees, Kāmapataye (Lord of love) for the  private parts, Pītavāsase (Who wears yellow clothes) for the hip,  Brahmā-mūrti-bhrte (Who takes the form of Brahmā) for the  navel, Viśvayonaye (Origin of the world) for the belly, Jñānagamyāya (Attainable by wisdom) for the heart, Vaikuntha-mūrtaye  ( Whose form pervades all) for the neck, Urugāyāya ( Widestrider) for the brow, Ksatrānta-kārine (Destroyer of the ksatriyas) for the arms, Sureśāya (Lord of the gods) for the upper  limbs and Sarvamūrtaye (The form of all) for all the limbs. The  honourable weapons should with devotion be worshipped with  their own names.
DDT: Here worship of all the limbs is described. All the  names should be followed by namah (obeisance to). With  these mantras one should worship the respective places.
"`One should then offer arghya with coconuts or other fruits. 342-343  The fruit should be placed on a conch-shell together with san
dalwood and flowers, and all should be tied together with one  thread. With these mantras the arghya should be offered according to the rules:
devadeva mahādeva mahāpurusa pūrvaja 344  subrahmanya namas te śtu punya-kīrti-vivardhana
"'O God of gods, Great God, Great Person, Firstborn, Dear to  the brāhmanas, bestower of fame and merit, obeisance to you!  śoka-moha-mahāpāpān mām uddhara bhavārnavāt 345
sukrta¥ na krta¥ kiñcij janmāntara-śatair api
"'Lift me up from lamentation, delusion and great sin, the ocean  of worldly existence! In even a hundred births I have not done  anything good.
vratenānena deveśa ye cānye mama pūrvajah 346  viyoniñ ca gatāś cānye pāpān mrtyuvaśa¥ gatah
ye bhavisyanti ye 'tītāh pretalokāt samuddhara
"'O Lord of gods, lift up my ancestors and also others who have  taken abominable births or through sin entered the abode of  Death, who are to come or who have passed on, from ghostly  existence.
ārtasya mama dīnasya bhaktir avyabhicārinī 347  dattam arghya¥ mayā tubhya¥ bhaktyā grhna gadādhara
"`I am unhappy and unfortunate, but my devotion is unflinching. Devotedly I have offered You this arghya. Please accept it, o  Carrier of the club!
`By hymns, offering lamps, songs and dance one should fully 348-352  please Hari, and by gifts of cloth, cows and food one should
please the guru. The Vaisnava should then perform the vrata
without engaging in any kind of cheating, and also perform  the vigil in order to please Padmanābha. At the end of night,  when the vrata is about to end, he should offer it to the guru. O  king, when he has offered it to the guru, the vrata is completed.  He should per form his daily duties and then eat together with  brāhmanas. The rest of the day should be spent for instance by  listening to stories about the Lord. One who performs the Unmīlanī-vrata in this way will dwell in the abode of Visnu for  one thousand times ten million kalpas:"
353-355 And also: `One who performs this Unmīlanī-vrata becomes  rich, lives long, gets sons and wisdom. The performer will not go  to hell.' In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna, in a conversation between Sūta and Śaunaka: As long as people do not perform the  Unmīlanī-vrata, they will have sin in their bodies and be unhappy, tortured by Yama. The great seers declare that the gift  given away or the offering offered on Unmīlanī will be eternal:  VAÑJULI-VRATA
356-358 In the Padma Purāna, in a conversation between Gautama and  Ambarīsa:`Vañjulī, dear to Hari, is when Ekādaśī is pure and  Dvādaśī also, and Dvādaśī furthermore continues into Trayodaśī. Whether Vañjulī falls in the light or the dark fortnight,  one should eat on Ekādaśī and perform the vrata on Dvādaśī.  One should break the fast in the middle of the second day of  Dvādaśī, and not on Trayodaśī. O king, one who does this attains the fruit of ten thousand sacrifices.
THE MANTRA OF DECLARATION  359 dvādaśyān tu nirāhārah pāranā cāpare 'hani  dharmārtha-kāma-moksārtha¥ karisye vañjulī-vratam
"For the sake of piety, wealth, enjoyment and liberation I will perform the Vañjulī-vrata by not eating on Dvādaśī and by breaking  the fast on the next day:'
'One should bathe in a river, tank, lake or at home and then 360-363  perform one's daily duties. Having fashioned a form of Nārā
yana out of a small amount of gold one should put it in a bejewelled jar and on top a vessel of copper. One should according to  oneś means offer a canopy, a peacock-feather or a flute, shoes  and a pot of brass with ghee. The copper vessel should be filled  with wheat, and the Lord should be bathed and offered nyāsa.  One should smear Him with oil, and then the kumbha should  be covered with two cloths.
`The kumbha should be tied with a flower-garland and 364.-367  then the Lord inside should be worshipped. The Lord should
then be offered beautiful, fragrant flowers. The following mantras should be used: Nārāyanāya namah (obeisance to Nārāyana) for the feet, Keśavāya for the knees, Mādhavāya for the  thighs, Kāmādhipāya (Highest Lord of love) for the private  parts, Govindāya for the hip, Mādhavamūrtaye (Whose form  is spring) for the navel, Viśvarūpāya for the belly, Kaustubhadhārine ( Wearer of Kaustubha) for the chest, Vaikunthāya for  the neck and Jyotīrūpine ( Whose form is light) for the eyes,  Sahasra-śīrsāya (He who has a thousand heads) for the head  and Viśvarūpine (Embodying all) for all the limbs. The weapons should be worshipped with their respective names. Thus  God should be worshipped.
`Then one should offer arghya with a beautiful coconut ac- 368  cording to the rules, on top of a conchshell filled with water,  aksata and flowers:
nārāyana jagannātha pītāmbarajanārdana 369  mām uddhara mahāvisno narakābdeh sanātana
"`O Nārāyana! Lord of the universe! You who wear yellow garments! Janārdana! O great Visnu! O eternal one! Please lift me  up from the ocean of hell!
sapta-kalpa gata¥ pāpa¥ yat krta¥ mama pūrvajaih 370  anenārghya-pradānena sakalan tat pranaśyatu
mukti¥ prayāntu pitaro mayā saha jagatpate
"`Whatever sin my forefathers have committed during seven  kalpas, please let all that be destroyed through this offering  of arghya. Lord of the world, may my ancestors and I attain  liberation.
371 mayā tavārghya-dānena ye cānye pitaro gatāh  vasantu tvat-samīpe 'dya deva-deva janārdana
"`O God of gods, Janārdana! May my forefathers and also other  deceased dwell near You today by this offering of arghya.
372 vrata¥ sampūrnatām yātu vañjulī-sambhava¥ mama  daśamī-samyutam deva yat krta¥ dvādasi-vratam  ajñānād athavā jñānāt paripūrna¥ tat astu me
"`Lord, lead my Vañjulī-vrata to completion. If this Dvādaśīvrata that I have performed has been connected with Daśamī  either unknowingly or knowingly, let it still be complete:'
373-377 `One who thus nicely offers arghya to the bane of Madhu  will stay in the splendid world of Visnu for a thousand kalpas.  Higher than a thousand Agnistoma-sacrifices is the Aśvamedha, and higher than a thousand Aśvamedhas is the Vājapeya.  Higher than a thousand Vājapeyas is the Pundarīka-sacrifice,  and higher than a thousand Pundarīkas is the Sautramani.  Higher than a thousand Sautramanis is the Rājasūya-sacrifice,  and higher than that, o king, is Vañjulī. Men who call out"Vañjulī!" in the age of Kali destroy sin from ten thousand births!
378-38o After worship, offering arghya and giving donations one  should offer incense, food and lamps to Visnu and then fully  honour the guru. One should give him cows, land, grain and  money. One should do this honestly in order to complete the  vrata. When the guru is pleased, Visnu is pleased, not otherwise. Therefore, one should worship the guru to please the  Carrier of the disk.
381-385 At night, one should keep vigil and listen to narrations  about Visnu. One should enthusiastically recite the Gītā, the  Thousand Names of Visnu and the Purāna spoken by Śuka in  order to please Hari. Anyone who recites or hears recieves the
fruit of donating a thousand cows for each book! One should  also sing, dance and play music in front of Hari. At sunrise, the  God and everything else should be given to the guru and one  should ask the Lord of gods and especially the guru for forgiveness. After performing all the occasional duties one should  eat together with friends:
In the Skanda Purāna, in a conversation between Brahmā 386-389  and Nārada, in connection with the vigil`The sin of forbidden
sexual relationships or eating what one should not eat, is destroyed on the day of Vañjulī. The sin of stealing land, or stealing  from God; the sin of cheating with jewels or scales; of stealing  gold; sin done unknowingly or knowingly; in an earlier birth  or in this birth: all is removed by performing a single day of  Vañjulī. One will have no mental suffering and no illnesses  causing excessive suffering.'
In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna, in a conversation between 390  Sūta and Saunaka: `O twice-born one, on the day of Vañjulī
He who rides on Garuda leaves His abode, goes to earth and  makes His dwelling there.
DDT: `There means amongst those who perform the  Vañjulī-vrata. In another reading it says that he 'gives  wealth', meaning that He gives what people want or that  He fulfills the desires of those who desire riches.
`When Yama, son of the Sun, sees a brāhmana averse to Vañ- 39I-393  julī he excitedly makes an agreement with Citragupta. "This
fool, averse to the vratas of Visnu will come to my abode. Remove all good deeds he has already performed! This person is  nothing but a headache for me, he always torments me:"
Furthermore: `Vañjulī is equal to the best of all vratas, the 394-399  king of all holy places, the gift of all gifts. A person who at that
time gives food to the twice-born with faith will attain the  abode of Krsna even if he is a sinner. One who at that time  worships Laksmī and Nārāyana made of gold and gives donations of food according to his means will attain Vaikuntha. O  brāhmana, if men who have fallen from their duties through
lust, greed or stupidity perform Vañjulī, they will be rid of three  generations of sin. Indeed, to fast on Vañjulī is the goal of all  scriptures, the opinion of all learned men, established by all  righteous men. A man who performs Vañjulī by fasting and by  honouring the brāhmanas according to his means will indeed  go to the highest abode:
TRISPRŚA-VRATA  400-401 In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna:'When the Madhusūdanī Dvādaśī falls on the bright fortnight of the month of Vaiśākha it is  known as Trisprśā, and it destroys ten millions of sins. If this  Madhusūdanī Dvādaśī in Vaiśākha moreover falls on a Wednesday, it will fulfill all the desires of men:
4o2-404 In the same book, Dvārakā-māhātmya:'If Ekādaśī is in the  beginning, Dvādaśī in the middle and Trayodaśī at the end of  the same day, one should fast, worship and sing in a temple of  Krsna on that rare occasion. By a single such fast one attains  the fruit of ten thousand sacrifices. In the age of Kali, during  this day the vigil at home is a hundred thousand times and the  dancing ten million times more effective, what to speak of doing these things in a temple of Krsna:
405-408 In the Padma Purāna, in a conversation between Sanat-kumāra and Vyāsa (6.34.2-77):"Now listen with attention! I will  tell you about the great Trisprśā-vrata, which eradicates all  offences and sins. The vrata for Visnu called Trisprśā bestows  pleasure to materialists and liberation to the desireless. Listen  to my narration! Great sage, if someone in the age of Kali always glorifies Trisprśā, Keśava is personally honoured by him.  Stern preparatory rites cannot take away all sins, but simply  mentioning"Trisprśá' can doubtlessly do that.
409-411 `The Agamas, Purānas, all the holy places, performing many  vratas or worshipping the gods cannot lead to liberation if one  has not performed Trisprśā. For the sake of liberation the God  of gods has created this queen of tithis. O brāhmana, to those  controlled by their senses, who have no understanding of medi
tation or the object of meditation, who are addicted to enjoying  lusty desires, Trisprśā immediately awards liberation.
'Previously, I was present when Visnu, carrier of the Cakra, 412-414  explained this to Śańkara, four-faced Brahmā and others on
the banks of the ocean of milk: "I give liberation to those who  perform Trisprśā, even if they do not control their senses or  know no Sańkhya-philosophy." Therefore, best of sages, perform Trisprśā, giver of liberation, in the company of saints!  Great sage, give up Sańkhya!
'If Trisprśā falls in the light fortnight of Kārttika and on a 415-420  Wednesday it destroys ten million sins. O seer, on this day  Maheśvara fasted and was freed from the sin of murder. By
fasting on Trisprśā at the advice of Bhrgu, the scull of the  brāhmana immediately fell from his hand. O great sage, by  fully fasting on Trisprśā eight generations of powerful forefathers got rid of the sin of killing thousands of brāhmanas.  Through the advice of Mādhava, goddess Gańgā became liberated from the sins of Kali by fully fasting on Trisprśā. By not  eating on Trisprśā the sin of killing thousands of brāhmanas is  destroyed, what to speak of lesser evils.
`O best of brāhmanas, liberation does not appear in Pra- 421-423  yāga, Kāśī, Gomatī or a temple of Krsna, but through fasting
on Trisprśā. Only by dying in Prayāga or Kāśī, and only by bathing in Gomatī does one attain liberation, not otherwise, but by  fasting on Trisprśā one attains liberation even at home. Through  Sańkhya-philosophy it is very difficult to achieve liberation for  someone who has uncontrolled senses and who is attached to  lusty desires. Therefore, o best of the brāhmanas, perform Trisprśā, giver of liberation!
'Śrī Vedavyāsa said: "What is this Trisprśā-dvādaśī like, 0 424  best of sages? Please now tell more about this liberator of men!"
'Srī Sanatkumara replied:"O brāhmana, Mādhava once spo- 425  ke about Trisprśā, giver of great boons, on the banks of the
Prācī Sarasvatī, in front of Jāhnavī Gańgā:'
`Srī Jāhnavī said: "In the age of Kali, people carrying the 426-427  burdens of enormous sins such as those of killing brāhmanas,
bathe in my waters, and by these hundreds of sins my body is  burned and defiled. O Lord, You who ride on Garuda, how shall  I be freed from these sins?"
428-43I `Srī Prācī Mādhava said: "Without a doubt I will instruct  you, child. Do not cry! Before me is my abode, Srīsthala. O  best of goddesses, there in front of me flows Prācīdevī, Sarasvatī. If you bathe there you will become magically cleansed.  Where Prācī Sarasvatī is, without a doubt there I also reside  together with hundreds of millions of holy places and gods.  Where Prācī Sarasvatī is, all sins are destroyed, especially in  front of me, and especially in the age of Kali:'
432 `Srī Jāhnavī said:"Lord of gods, I am not able to always go  there. O Mādhava, please tell me how I can get rid of sin here!"  433-435 `Srī Prācī Mādhava answered: "Higher than the Sarasvatī,
millions of holy places, millions of sacrifices, gifts, vratas, austerities, muttering mantras, Sañkhya or Yoga is Trisprśā, awarder of  the fruit of the four stages of life. Celebrate this vrata, beautiful  one! O best of rivers, in whatever month it falls, whether in the  light or dark forthnight, you should perform it. It will take away  your sin:'
436-437 `Śrī Mandākinī said:"O Mādhava, please tell me what this  Trisprśā is. Tell me today also about its greatness. When Daśamī, Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī all occur on the same day, that is  called Trisprśā. Lord, is it like this? O master, I do not know, so  please tell me:'
438-44I `Śrī Prācī Mādhava replied: "O goddess, the Trisprśā you  have described is demoniac! It should be diligently avoided,  like a sannyāsi without vows. It gives life and strenght to the  demons and devils. It should be carefully avoided, like a menstruating woman. Just like one always avoids contact with a  woman in her monthly courses, so Vaisnavas should avoid my  day if it has been touched by Daśamī. O Jāhnavī, one who has  my grace gets hundreds of thousands of sins destroyed, but  those who are without it, Trisprśā will lead into misfortune.
442-446 "`When Ekādaśī, Dvādaśī and at the end of night Trayodaśī are combined, that is known as Trisprśā, not when Daśa
mī is involved. One who performs a vrata when Ekādaśī is  combined with Daśamī drinks poison and eats the excrement  of dogs. Knowing this, never celebrate my day when it is combined with Daśamī, for it will destroy all the merit of millions  of lives. If there is doubt, especially if the fortnight is lenghtened,  then on my order one should always perform my dear Dvādaśī. Those devoted to me should on my order celebrate my  day and know how to make sure that it is not contaminated by  Daśamī:'
`Śrī Vedavyasa said:"O brāhmana, tell me about the rules I 447  am to follow!"
`Śrī Sanatkumāra replied: "One should according to one's 448-450  means fashion a form of Dāmodara of gold. One should take a
vessel of copper and fill it with rice. One should also fill a jug with  pure water, some gold, a diamond, a sapphire, a ruby and a pearl,  add some camphor and aloe and tie it with a flower garland. One  should perform nyāsa, bathe the Lord and smear Him with oil.  Then one should devotedly cover each jar with a cloth.
DDT: One should perform nyāsa on both the vessel and  jug. This applies in the previous cases also.
"`Then under the direction of the guru one should perform 45I-453  worship with mantras, beautiful seasonal flowers and soft
tulasī leaves. One should offer a parasol with a stick of bamboo, sandals covered with cloth, splendid foodstuffs and many  fruits. One should also offer a sacred thread, an upper cloth  and a beautiful, strong and long cane of bamboo.
"`Dāmodarāya for the feet, Mādhavāya for the knees, Kāma- 454-458  pataye for the private parts, Vāmanamūrtaye (He who takes
the form of Vāmana) for the hip, Padmanābhāya (Lotusnaveled one) for the navel, Viśvamūrtaye for the belly, Jñānagamyāya for the heart, Śrīkanthāya (He who has a beautiful  neck) for the neck, Sahasra-bāhave (Thousand-armed one)  for the arms, Yoganāyakāya (Lord of Yoga), Urugāyāya for the  brow, Sahasra-śirase (Thousand-headed one) for the head,  their own names for the weapons and Cārurūpine namah (The
very form of loveliness) for all the limbs. With these names  one should devotedly worship according to the rules and then  likewise offer arghya with a beautiful coconut tied with a string  to a conchshell filled with water. This is the mantra:
459 smrto harasi pāpāni satya¥ yadijanārdana  duhsvapna¥ durnimittañ ca manaso durvicintitam  46o nārakañ ca bhaya¥ deva bhaya¥ durgati-sambhavam
bhayam anyan mahādeva aihika¥ pāralaukikam  461 sarva¥ nāśaya me visno grhānārghya¥ janārdana  mama bhaktih sadaivāstu dāmodara tavopari
"`If it is true that You take away sin just by being remembered,  Lord, then take away my nightmares, bad omens, bad thoughts,  fear of hell, fear of taking a horrible rebirth and all other fears,  of this world or the next. O great God, o Visnu, destroy them  all for me! Janārdana, please accept this arghya! May my devotion always be directed to You, Dāmodara.
462-466 "`Then one should offer ārātrika with incense, lights and  foods. O best of sages, having done all this according to the rules  one should carry the conch of Hari on one's head and then honour one's own guru. One should give him pure clothes, sandals, a  parasol, a decorated waterpot, food, betel nuts, grains and money,  and worship him with sandalwood, garlands and so forth. After having worshipped the Lord of the god of gods one should  perform the vigil of Hari by singing, dancing and reading the  scriptures. At the end of night one should again properly offer  arghya to the Lord. After performing duties such as bathing  one should eat together with brāhmanas:"
PAKSAVARDHINI-VRATA  467-472 In the Padma Purāna it is stated by Brahmā (6.36.2, 4-22): `If  the New Moon or Full Moon tithi is full, that is longer than 24  hours, and continues into the next day, then the preceding Dvādaśī is Paksavardhinī, equal to thousands of Aśvamedhas. O
best of the brāhmanas, now listen to the rules for its worship!  After fully worshipping Visnu with mantras, one should please  Him by an offering of arghya. One should install a new kumbha, filled with water and smeared with sandalwood, with some  gold, a diamond, a sapphire, a ruby and a pearl inside and tied  with a flower garland, and upon it a vessel of copper filled with  rice. One should fashion a form of Mādhava out of gold, and  then bathe this God with milk, yoghurt, ghee, honey and sugarwater. Then one should smear Him with saffron, aloe and sandalwood. One should offer a pair of cloths, a parasol and shoes.
`Now one should worship the Lord of gods, situated on the 473-476  kumbha, with Padmanābhaya for the feet, Yogamūrtaye for the
knees, Nrsi¥hāya for the thighs, Jñānapradāya (Giver of knowledge) for the hip, Viśvanāthāya (Lord of all) for the belly,  Srīdharāya (Abode of the goddess of fortune) for heart, Kaustubha-kanthāya (Whose neck is adorned with the Kaustubhajewel) for the neck, Ksatrāntakāya for the arms, Vyomamūrtāya (Whose form is space) for the brows, Sarvarūpine for the  head, their own names for the weapons and Divyarūpine namah  (Obeisance to Him whose form is divine) for all the limbs.  Having worshipped according to the rules one should then offer  arghya with a beautiful coconut to the God of gods, carrying  the disk. This mantra should be used:
saritsārārnava-potāya pāpakaksā-mahānala 477  narakāgni praśamana janma-mrtyu jarāpaha
mā¥ uddhara jagannātha patita¥ bhava-sāgare 478  grhānārghya¥ mayā datta¥ padmanābha namo śtu te
"'O boat on the ocean of repeated birth and death, great fire for  heaps of sin, extinguisher of the fires of hell, remover of birth,  death and old age, o Lord of the universe, please save me! I  have fallen into the ocean of worldly existence. Accept this argya that I offer. Obeisances to You, lotus-naveled one:'
`One should then offer attractive, tasty and juicy fruits to 479-484  Mādhava and also incense with aloe, camphor, ghee and bdel
lium with devotion to the Lord. Also, a lamp with ghee or sesame-seed oil should be offered. When one has done all this according to the rules, worship of the guru should be performed. One should give the guru clothes, a turban, a jacket and money according to one's means. One should offer him food and betel and then fully please him by giving him the offered arghya. Then one should pass the day engaged in one's own business or as one is able, if poor, and then perform the vigil with song and dance:
JAYA-VRATA 485-486 In the Brahmā Purāna, in a conversation between Vaśistha and Mandhātr: `If the moon is in the asterism Punarvasu on a Dvādaśī in the light forthnight, that Dvādaśī is known by the name Jayā, and it is the foremost of tithis. A person who fasts on that day will not fall into terrible hell, but without a doubt attain a fruit equal to that from sacrifices such as the Agnistoma:
487 jayā-vratam anustheyam yathaivonmīlanī-vratam
The Jayā-vrata should be celebrated just like the Unmīlanī-vrata. 488 As it is said by Mārkāndeya: `One should perform the Jayāvrata in a place where the water that has bathed a Śālagrāma and that which is mixed with tulasī is present:
DDT: The Jayā-vrata should be performed at places such as the confluences of rivers.
VIJAYA-VRATA 489-492 In the same place in the Brahmā Purāna:`When the asterism Sravana is present during Dvādaśī in the light fortnight, that tithi is called Vijayā, and it is the very best of tithis: In the Visnu-dharmottara: `When the asterism Sravana is present during Dvādaśī in the light fortnight, that most meritorious Dvādaśī is known as Vijayā. For men, bathing at that time is like bathing at all holy places, and having worshipped at that
time, one attains the fruit of a whole year's worship. By chanting one mantra one attains the fruit of chanting a thousand times. The merit of giving gifts is thousandfold, so also feeding the brāhmanas, sacrifices and fasting.'
RULES OF THE VRATA
ādau gururiv namaskrtya tatah sañkalpam ācaret 493 śara-śārńga-dharam devam sauvarnarri racayettathā
Having first bowed to the guru one should declare the vrata. Then one should fashion a golden image of the Lord carrying bow and arrow
MANTRA OF DECLARATION
dvādaśyān to nirāhārah sthitvāham apare 'hani 494 bhoksye trivikramānanta śaranam me bhavācyuta
`O Trivikrama, o Ananta! On Dvādaśī I will remain fasting and on the next day I will eat. Acyuta, please be my shelter.'
sopavītan to kalasam pūrvavat sthāpayed vratī 495 patram tad-upari nyasyet tāmram vainavam eva vā
The one performing the vrata should as previously establish a vessel with a holy thread and place a jar of copper or bamboo on top of that.
tatropaveśya samsthāpya devam vīsada-candanaih 496 ālipya śubhram vasane dadyāc chatrañ ca pāduke
The Lord should be invited and established there. He should be anointed with pure sandalwood, and then one should offer two cloths, a parasol and sandals.
vāsudevāyeti śirah śrīdhārāyeti vai mukham 497 krsnāyeti ca kantham vai vaksa1~ śrīpataye iti
498 śastrāśastra-dhārine bāhum kakse ca vyāpakāya vai girīśāyodaran medhram trailokya jananāya ca
499 jaghanavń cārcayed vidvān sarvādhipataye iti sarvātmane iti pādāv evam añgāni pūjayet
The limbs of the Lord should by the wise be worshipped with the following mantras: Vāsudevāya for the head, Srīdharāya for the face, Krsnāya for the neck, Srīpataye (Husband of the goddess of fortune) for the chest, Sastrāstra-dhārine (Carrier of weapons for striking and throwing) for the arms, Vyāpakāya (Pervading one) for the side, Girīśāya (Lord of the mountain) for the belly, Trailokya jananāya (Source of the three worlds) for the penis, Sarvādhipataye (Highest Lord of all) for the buttocks and Sarvātmane namah (Obeisance to the Self of all) to the feet.
DDT: The limbs are listed here in reverse order. THE ARGHYA-MANTRA FOR VIJAYA-VRATA
á0o śañkha-cakra gadā padma- sārañga-śara-bhūsita grhānārghyam mayā dattam pārñgupāne namo śtu to
`O You who are decorated with the conch, disk, club, lotus, bow and arrow, please accept this arghya which I offer. Obeisances to You, Carrier of the bow!'
5oi ity arghyavñ pūrvavat krtvā dhūpa-dīpau samarpya ca ghrta-pakva-praghānāni naivedyāni nivedayet
After presentling arghya as before, incense and lamps should be offered, and foods cooked in ghee.
502 tāmbūlādīni dattvātha krtvā jāgaranam niśi prātahsnātvārcayitveśam puspāñjalim athārpayet
One should also offer things such as betel and keep vigil at night. At sunrise one should bathe and then offer a handful of Rowers to the Lord.
THE PRAYER~MANTRA FOR VIJAYA-VRATA
namas to astugovinda budha-śravana-samjñaka 503 aghorarri cāksayarñ krtvā sarvasaukhya-prado bhava
`May there be obeisances to You, Govinda, known as Wednesday and Śrāvana! Make me fearless and eternal, give me all happiness!'
iti prārthya tatah sarvam dattvā cārghyasń pratosya hi 504 bhaktyā viprān bhojayítvā sukham pāranam ācaret
After praying like this, one should happily give away everything, including the arghya. With devotion one should feed the brāhmanas and then joyfully break the fast.
bhadre māsi budhasyāhni yadi syād vijayā-vratam 505 tadā sarva-vratebhyo śya māhātmyam atiricyate
If, during the month of Bhadra, Vijayā-vrata happens to fall on a Wednesday, then the greatness of that day exceeds that of all other vratas.
DDT: Here he describes the fruit of the vrata at a specific time. The reason for this is that that time corresponds with the appearance of Śrī Vāmanadeva. Likewise also further on (iá.548-660).
JAYANTI-VRATA In the Brahmā Purāna: `When the constellation Rohinī ap- 506-509 pears on a Dvādaśī in the light fortnight, that tithi is known by
the name Jayantī, and it takes away all sin. Whatever great or small sins one has performed during seven births meet with
destruction if Govinda at that time is worshipped with devotion: In the Skanda Purāna, in a discussion between Brahmā and Nārada: 'Remover of all sin, bestower of the fruit of all meritous deeds: Dvādaśī combined with Rohinī is the wonderful vrata called Jayantī: Furthermore: `The .life of people who spend their time without the day of Jayantī is defect, it passes in vain:
RULES FOR THIS VRATA
510 guru¥ pranamya samprārthya grhnīyān niyama¥ krtī krsnais tilaiś ca madhyāhne snāyād dhātrīphalena ca
The performer should bow to the guru, ask him questions and accept rules. At midday he should bathe with black sesame seeds and myrobalan.
DDT: The rules for turning to the guru and asking him questions are described by Brahmā to Nārada in the Skanda Purāna: 'First one should go the house of the guru and then follow rules. One should put oneś head to his feet and touch them with the head. With hands folded in supplication one should then ask the guru thus: "Best of the brāhmanas, o master, please give me the rules for Dvādaśī!"' Then, in the same book: `One should first accept the rules, beginning with giving up the toothbrush. Through rules one attains the fruit, nothing good comes without them: These rules should be understood to be the ones already described in connection with Ekādaśī.
Then he describes rules for this Dvādaśī. One should bathe with sesame and myrobalan, using the myrobalan for anointing the head and the black sesame for washing the limbs. This is also described in the same book: At midday on the day of fasting one should bathe with black sesame-sees and anoint the head with the fruit of myrobalan for the greatest auspiciousness:
THE MANTRA OF DECLARATION
jayantyān to nirāhārah śvobhūte parameśvara 511 bhoksyāmi pundarīkāksa śaranañ caranau tava
'O Highest Lord, I will fast on Jayanti and eat on the next day. O Lotus-eyed one, Your feet are my shelter!'
pūrvavat sthāpayet kumbha¥ tasyopari ca bhājanam 512 hairanya¥ rājata¥ tāmra¥ vainavani vā tilair bhrtam
As before, one should establish a kumbha and above it a vessel made of gold, silver, copper or bamboo, filled with sesame-seeds. DDT: As before means `One should install a new kumb
ha, ñlled with water and smeared with sandalwood, with some gold, a diamond, a sapphire, a ruby and a pearl inside and tied with a flower garland, and upon it a vessel of copper filled with rice' (13.4~o), just as was described in connection with the Paksavardhinī-vrata. This is also described in the Skanda Purāna: 'Having performed the midday duties one should establish a whole jar, filled with pure water and some gold, a diamond, a sapphire, a ruby and a pearl. It should be perfumed with pure sandalwood, camphor, contain some good incense and be tied with a garland of nice flowers:
On top of this kumbha another vessel should be placed. He gives different alternatives for that vessel in order of preference. About this the Skanda Purāna states: `Upon that one should faithfully place a vessel of gold. In the absence of that, o sage, it can be of silver, copper or bamboo:
tatra ca snāpita¥ haima¥ devakī-stana-pāyinam 513 mātr-vaktreksaka¥ deva¥ niveśyāvahayed vratī
The performer of the vrata should there place a golden image of the Lord, drinking from the breast of Devakī and gating at her face, and then install it by bathing.
DDT: One should fashion a golden form of Devakī and  then one of the Lord sitting in her lap, drinking from her  breast, according to the descriptions in scripture, place  that on the above mentioned vessel, and then install it.  How? By bathing with milk and so forth. The details of  the-Lord's form are given in the Skanda Purāna: `Upon  the vessel one should place the queen, made of gold and  according to the descriptions, smilingly offering her  breast to her son. Drinking from the beautiful breast of  His mother, His face is smeared with milk. With great  love He incessantly gazes at His motherś face:
THE MANTRA FOR INSTALLATION  DURING JAYANTI-VRATA
514 ehi ehi jagannātha vaikuntha purusottama  parivāraganopeta laksmyā Baba jagatpate
`Come, come, Master of the universe, o Penetrating one, Supreme  person, together with your associates and with Laksmī, o Lord  of the world!`
5I5 pratisthāpya manojūtīr iti mantrena vaisnava1~  pādyādīn upakalpyānulepanair anulepayet
After installing with the mantra beginning with `mano jūtī',  the Vaisnava should offer articles such as water for bathing the  feet, and then anoint Him with ointments.
DDT: `With ointments' means that one should anoint  the Lord, using a stick of tulasī, with sandalwood paste  perfumed with sañdal oil, saffron, camphor, aloe, musk,  etc. This is also described in the Skanda Purāna: `O  greatly fortunate one! Using a stick of tulasī one should  anoint the Lord with sandalwood paste mixed with  saffron, camphor, aloe, lotus oil, sandelwood oil, perfume  from Kashmir and musk: This should be done as as described in earlier verses.
vastrayugma¥ sita¥ dattvā puspādīni samarpayet 516  dīpān prajvālayec chaktyā kuryāt kusuma-mandapam
One should offer two white cloths, and then Rowers and so on.  One should burn lamps and according to capability construct  a pavillion of flowers.
DDT: `Flowerś means mallikā ( Jasminum Zambac), mālatī ( Jasminum Grandiflorum), campakā (Michelia Campaka), etc:And so on' means tulasī blossoms and leaves, bilva  (Aegle Marmelos, wood-apple)- leaves, and so forth. Also  fruits such as bottle gourd and coconuts are included. The  Skanda Purāna says: `Greatly fortune one, with great devotion Janārdana should be worshipped with flowers such as  mallikā, mālatī, campakā and ketakī (Pandatus Odoratisimus), white and black oleander (Nerium Odorum), yūthikā ( Jasminum Auriculatum), śatapatra and many other  kinds of flowers according to season; with unbroken bilva  leaves and tender tulasī leaves and with fresh and beautiful  coconuts, dates, pomegranates, bījapūra (Andropogon Saccharatus), betel nuts, grapes, maces and bananas.`
gita-vādyādibhil7 śānti- pāthaih stotraiś ca kīrtanaih 517  ārabhetāśathah pūjāriz gurum sampūjya bhaktitah
After fully honouring the guru one should without duplicity begin the worship with song, music, invocations of peace, hymns  and praise.
DDT: `Hymns' are also explained in the Skanda Purāna:  `Recitations of peace, readings of scripture and reciting  the Gītā: these are the three first. The Thousand Names  of Visnu are the fourth and the Liberation of the Elephant the fifth. The childhood activities of Visnu  should be recited again and again:
`Without duplicity': one should be honest in the worship of the Lord, beginning with worship of the guru.  About this the same book says (5.3.io3.i83): `In offering  śrāddha, giving donations, celebrating festivals, visiting  holy places and performing vratas and sacrifices one must  not be duplicious if one desires the goal of religion: The
Bhavisya Purāna says (i.i69.q~): 'When one under the  influence of illusion does not follow all the rules one will  not attain the result, but is called an offender of the gods:
First the guru should be completely honoured, only  then should the worship begin. This is the described in  the Skanda Purāna: `One who oversteps the guru, instructor in duties, will lose his religiosity, wealth and enjoyment, indeed, all that he desires. According to one's  means one should devotedly give him cows, land, gold,  property, white rice, cloth, ornaments and sweet words. After this one should worship Devakī and Keśava.'
THE WORSHIP OF DEVAKI  5i8 adite devamātas tvarń sarva-pāpa pranāśini  atas tvāvń pūjayisyāmi bhīto bhavabhayasya to
`O Aditi, you are the mother of God, remover of all sin. Now  I will worship you, for I am struck with the fear of worldly  existence.
519 pūjitāsi yathā devail7 prasannā tvam varānane  pūjitā me tathā bhaktyā prasādarń kuru suvrate
`Beautiful one, just as you are pleasingly worshipped by the  gods, so you are now worshipped by me with devotion. Be merciful, o vinous one!
520 yathā putrarń barim labdhvā prāptā to nirvrtih parā  tām eva nirvrtirń devi svaputrāt darśayasva me
'Queen, the birth of your son Hari gave you the highest bliss.  Show me that same bliss through your son!'
521 mantrenānena sampūjya devakīrń krsnam arcayet  tatah samātrkāyārghyam tasmai pūrvavad arpayet
With this mantra one should worship Devakī, and then Krsna.  Then one should offer Him and His mother arghya as previously described.
THE MANTRAS FOR WORSHIP  avatāra-sabasrāni karosi madhusūdana 52z
na to sankhyāvatārānārń kaśc~ jānāti vai bhuvi
`O Madhusūdana, You descend in thousands of forms. No one  on earth knows the number of Your descents.
devā brahmādayo vāpi svarūpam na vidus lava 523  atas tvārń pūjayisyāmi mātur utsańga-samsthitam
'The gods headed by Brahmā do not know Your nature. I will  now worship You, sitting in the lap of Your mother.
vāñchitav kuru me deva duskrtam caiva nāśaya 524  kurusva me dayārń deva samsārārti-bhayāpaha
'God, please fulfill my desires, destroy my sins! God, remover  of the fear of the pain of birth and death, be merciful!'
THE MANTRA FOR OFFERING ARGHYA
jātah karńsa-vadhārthāya bhubhārottāranāya ca 525  devatānārri hitārthāya dharma-sarństhāpanāya ca
kauravānārń vināśāya daityānārń nidhanāya ca 526  grhānārghyam mayā dattaril devakyā sabito bare
'You appeared to kill Karñsa, remove the burden of the earth,  please the gods, reestablish religious principles, destroy the  Kauravas and to annihilate the demons. O Hari together with  Devakī, please accept this arghya offered by me:
DDT: After worshipping Devakī one should worship  Krsna together with Devakī. Then, according to the Skanda Purāna: `O best of sages, one should first offer Krsna  and Devakī arghya that will bestow the fruit of all desires: The above mentioned mantra should be used. A  specific mantra is mentioned in the same book:
śrīkrsnāya devakī-sahitāya saganāya saparivārāya laksmīsahitāya  argyarń namah
`Obeisance to Śri Krsna together with Devakī, associates,  companions and Laksmī! Pleace accept this arghya.'
The offering should be done as earlier described, with a  pure coconut, etc, as described in connection with the Paksavardhinī-vrata. Following that description, one should  tie a pure coconut with flowers to a conch and then offer  arghya with this. This is the meaning.
GREATNESS OF THE ARGHYA
527 In the Skanda Purāna:`One who offers arghya on this earth attains the same merit as if he had given away the whole world  with all its oceans and rivers:
528 dhūpa-dīpau samarpyātha naivedyarń vividharń śubham  phalāni ca vicitrāni tāmbūlādini cārpayet
After offering incense and lamps one should offer different kinds  of splendid foodstuffs, various fruits, betelnuts, and so on.  DDT: `Different kinds' means food cooked in ghee, rice  boiled in milk, and so on.`Splendid' means most eminent.  `Fruits' refers to coconuts, etc, as listed in the Skanda  Purāna earlier. And so on' implies a mirror, parasol, yak
tail whisk, etc.
529 krtvā nīrājanarńgītarń nrtyād utsavam ācaret  kuryāj jāgaranariv krsna bālya-līlā-kathādinā
After offering ārātrika, one should sing and dance and thus celebrate the festival. At night one should keep vigil by reading  about the childhood pastimes of Krsna, etc.
DDT: `Etc' means also listening to them, and also the  later pastimes. The importance of this recitation will be  repeated later on (i5.475~, and has already been mentioned in connection with the vigil (i3.í29).
GREATNESS OF THE VIGIL
In the Skanda Purāna (6.4.39.3):`One who recites the Purānas 530  on the vigil of Padmanābha burns up the sins of ten million  births just like a heap of cotton is consumed:
DDT: `Like a heap of cotton is consumed' means as  quickly as ñre burns up a heap of cotton. Another reading  has dissolved', which has the same meaning, or then it  means as quickly as a heap of cotton is dissolved in the  wind.
prātah krtvā kriyārń nityārń tanmūrtim gurave `rpayet 531  vastrādikam daksināń ca dattvā kurvīta pāranam
After performing one's daily duties at sunrise one should present  the form to the guru. Then one should give him clothes, money,  etc, and break the fast.
DDT: `The form' refers to the earlier described form of  the Lord and Devakī. The meaning is that it should be  given away. In order to create a shortened presentation all  this is not clearly written down. `Etć means that one  should also donate rings, jackets, turbans, coins and so  forth according to one's capacity.
About this the same book says: `One who with devotion per- 532-533  forms the Jayantī according to these rules liberates 2r relatives
on his wifeś side, and one who concisely performs the vigil, dear  to Hari, attains his mind's desired fruit, and then goes to the  abode of Visnu:
PAPANAŚINI-VRATA  It is said in the Brahmā Purāna: `Whenever the asterism 534-537  Pusyā appears on a Dvādaśī in the light fortnight, that is called  Pāpanāśinī, the greatly meritorious. When Sagara, Kukuts
tha, Dhun-dhumāra and Gādhi worshipped Krsna on this  day He gave them the whole earth. It liberates one without a  doubt from whatever terrible sins one has performed with
words, mind and body for seven births. A man who fasts on  one such day combined with Pusyā attains the fruit of a thousand Ekādaśīs!
538-539 `Bathing, giving in charity, muttering mantras, sacrifices,  study, worship of the gods: whatever one does on this day becomes unlimitedly greater. Therefore, this vrata should be diligently performed by one who desires a fruit:
RULES FOR THE VRATA  54o guru¥ pranamya niyama¥ svīkuryād vratahetukam  kumbham āmalakī-mūle pūrvavat sthāpayed vratī
One should bow to the guru and accept regulations for the  vrata. Then the performed of the vrata should establish, as before, a kumbha at the foot of a myrobalan-tree.
THE MANTRA OF DECLARATION  54I dvādaśyān tu nirāhārah sthitvā 'ham apare 'hani  bhoksyāmi jāmadagnyeśa śarana¥ me bhavācyuta
`O son of Jamadagni, o Lord, I will remain fasting on Dvādaśī  and eat on the next day. O Acyuta, please be my shelter!'
54z vāripūrna¥ tatah pātra¥ nyaset kumbhopari vratī  sundara¥ tāmra-racita¥ venu-racitam eva vā  543 māsakena tad-ardhena tad-ardhenāthavā krtam
haima¥ paraśurāmañ ca snapita¥ sthāpayet tatah  544 dattvā vastrayugacchatra- pādukāh śveta-candanail7  ālipya tulasī-puspair abhyarcyāńgāni pūjayet
The performer of the vrata should now place a beautiful vessel  made of copper or bamboo, filled with water, on a jug. Then he  should install a form of Paraśurāma made of a little gold. He  should present two cloths, a parasol, sandals, anoint with white
sandalwood paste, offer tulasī leaves and flowers, and then  worship all the limbs.
WORSHIP OF THE LIMBS
viśokāyeti caranau jānunī viśvarūpine 545  hayagrīvāyeti cārū katim dāmodarāya ca
kandarpāyeti vaiguhya¥ nābhim vai padmamāline 546  anantāyeti jathara¥ śrīkanthāyeti vai galam
bāhū haimāńgadāyeti vaikunthāyeti mastakam 547  jyotīrūpāyeti netre nāsāgra¥ śokanāśine
lalāta¥ vāmanāyeti rāmāyeti śruvau yajet 548  sarvātmane samastāńga¥ śastrāni sva-sva-samjñayā
One should worship the feet with Viśokāya (Sorrowless), the  knees with Viśvarūpine, the thighs with Hayagrīvāya (Horseheaded), the hip with Dāmodarāya, the private parts indeed with  Kandarpāya, the navel with Padmamāline (Lotus-naveled), the  belly with Anantāya, the neck with Śrīkanthāya, the arms with  Haimāńgadayā ( Wearer of golden bracelets), the head with  Vaikunthāya, the eyes with Jyotīrūpāya, the tip of the nose  with Śokanāśine (Destroyer of sorrow), the brow with Vāmanāya, the ears with Rāmāya, all the limbs with Sarvātmane namah and the weapons with their respective names.
pradāya pūrvavac cārghya¥ dbūpa-dīpau samarpya ca 549  naivedyādi pradāyātha deva¥ samprārthayec ca tam
After offering incense and lamps one should offer arghya as before. Then fruits and so on should be presented, and then one  should pray to this Lord.
THE MANTRA FOR OFFERING ARGHYA
namas te deva-deveśa jāmadagnya namo śtu te 550  grhānārghya¥ mayā dattam āmalyā sahito hare
`Obeisance to You, Lord of the god of gods! May there be obeisances to You, o son of Jamadagni. Please accept this arghya with  myrobalan that I offer You, o Hari!'
THE PRAYER MANTRA
55I jāmadagnya namas te śtu ksatriyānta-karāya ca  sarvāni yāni pāpāni sapta janma-krtāny api
552 ksaya¥ yāntu mamaivādya tvat-prasādāc ca bhārgava  vācika¥ mānasa¥ pāpa¥ jñānato jñānato 'pi vā
`O son of Jamadagni, obeisances to You, destroyer of the ksatriyas! Today, through Your mercy, descendant of Bhrgu, destroy all my sin, even that committed during seven births, by  words, in the mind, knowingly or unknowingly!
553 āyur yaśas tathārogya¥ dhana¥ dhānyañ ca sampadam  saubhāgya¥ lava bhaktasya santāna¥ vipula¥ bhavet
`May Your devotee always have an abundance of longevity, beauty,  good health, wealth, grain, success, fortune and descendants.  554 sarvān kāmān āpnuvāni divya¥ saukhya¥ nirantaram
ante py astu mameśāna bhaktis tvac-carane prabho  Attaining all desires and endless divine bliss, o Lord, may I even  at the end have devotion to Your feet, o Master.
555 janārdana hrsīkeśa laksmīnātha surārcita  rāma rāma mahābāho kārtavīrya-vināśana
556 etat sarva¥ mayā datta¥ jñāna¥ jñeya¥ tavācyuta  mām uddhara jagannātha daya¥ krtvā mamopari
`O Janārdana, Hrsīkeśa, Lord of Laksmī, worshipped by the gods,  Rāma, Rāma, strong-armed one, killer of the son of Kartavīrya!  All this I offer You. O Acyuta, You are knowledge and the object of  knowledge. Lord of the universe, save me! Have mercy upon me!'
WORSHIP OF THE MYROBALAN TREE
pītā pītāmahāś cānye aputrā ye ca gotrinah 557  vrksa yoni¥ gatā ye ca ye ca kītatvam āgatah
raurave narake ye ca mahā-raurava-sarñjñake 55g  viyoni¥ ca gatā ye ca ye ca brahmānda-madhya gāh
piśācatva¥ gatā ye ca ye ca pretatvam āgatah 559  te pibantu mayā datta¥ dhātrī-mūle sadā payah
te sarve trptim āyāntu dhātrī-mūla-nisecanāt 560
A father, grandfather or any relative who has no son, who has  been born as a tree, become a worm, gone to the hell Raurava  or to the one known as Mahā-raurava, who has taken a low  birth, entered the middle of the universe, become a witch or a  ghost: may they all always drink the water I have poured at the  root of this myrobalan tree. May they all become nourished by  my sprinkling of water at the root of the myrobalan:
iti dhātrī¥ cāhhisicya vārān astottara¥ śatam 56r  tāñ ca pradaksinīkrtya kuryāj jāgarana¥ vratī
After saying this, the performer of the vrata should sprinkle  water one hundred and eight times and then circumambulate  the tree. Then he should perform the vigil.
prātaś ca deva¥ nīrājya nitya¥ karma samāpya ca 562  mūrtyādi gurave dattvā prāgvat pāranam ācaret
In the morning one should perform ārātrika and then one's  daily duties. After giving the form, etc, to the guru one should,  as before, break the fast.
phālgune māsi yady esā dvādaśi pāpanāśinī 563  bhavet tadā vratasyāsya mahimā syād viśesatah
If the Pāpanāśinī Dvādaśī comes in the month of Phālguna,  then the glory of this vrata becomes especially great.
CONCLUSION  564 iti kramena likhita¥ vijayādi-vrata-trayam
bhavisyottara-skāndābhyām śrībrahmānda purānatah
Thus the three vratas beginning with Vijayā have been described according to the Bhavisya-, Skanda- and Srī Brahmānda Purānas.
DDT: For shortnesses sake the three vratas beginning  with Vijayā and their rules have been described according  to the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya and other Purānas,  but not by directly quoting their statements, fearing to  expand the book too much. Therefore the Bhavisya, etc,  have not been mentioned while describing the rules. The  Vijayā-vrata follows the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya  Purāna (4.76) the Jayantī-vrata the Skanda Purāna, and  the Pāpanāśinī-vrata the Brahmānda Purāna.
565 anye pi dvādasi-bhedā bahavah santi viśrutāh  agrato lekhanīyās te tat-tan-māsa-prasañgatah
There are also many other kinds of famous Dvādaśīs. They will  be described further on in connection with the respective month  in which they occur.
Thus ends the thirteenthVilāsa, called `Celebrating the Visnu-vrata',  in the Śrī Bhagavad-bhakti-vilāsa, written by Śrī Gopāla Bhatta.




FROM VILĀSA XIV  FESTIVALS OF THE
FIRST HALF OF THE YEAR  BHAIMI EKADAŚI
In the Matsya Purāna (69.Z,12-13): `Śrī Brahmā said: "O im- 174-175  mortal lord, how can men attain freedom from disease, endless
wealth and liberation by only a little austerity?" Srī Maheśvara  replied:"Your question is exemplary, Brahmā. The answer is a  great secret of religion, and it will be explained to Bhīma, the  wolfbelly, later on:"
Furthermore (69.16-18):'This vrata is foremost of all vratas. 176-178  Vāsudeva, the self of all, the teacher of the world, will explain it. It
bestows the fruit of all sacrifices, it destroys all sins, it kills all demons and it is honoured by all gods. It is the purest of the pure,  the bliss of all bliss, the last of the coming and the first of the gone:
DDT:'The last of the coming and the first of the gone'  means that this is the last amongst vratas to come, but  not only that, it is also first amongst those in the past. In  this way a special greatness is shown. In the same book  the Lord says to Bhīma: `Fully perform this vrata that I  have explained to you lovingly. Since you will perform  this vrata, o steadfast one, it will be named after you. This  Bhīma-dvādaśī, which previously was called Kalyāninī, is  auspicious. It takes away all sin:
In the same book, the Lord says to Bhīma (69.19-20):`O Bhā- 179-180  rata, when you are unable to fast on Astamī (the eight tithí),  Caturdaśī (the fourteenth tithi), Dvādaśī or any other day, then
this tithi is most auspicious. It removes sin. Fast according to  the rules and go to the highest abode of Visnu!'
Moreover, in the same book, at the end of the descriptions
of the rules (69.62):'Indra, the Vasus and the gods could not 181  describe the fruit one attains by performing this vrata, even if  they had a billion tongues!'
vrate krtya-vidhiś cāsmin pūjā-vidhi-viśesavān  vaisnavaiś ced apeksyah syāj jñeyo matsya purānatah
If Vaisnavas desire to perform this vrata, the rules for performing it and the particular rules for worship are found in the  Matsya Purāna.
DDT: There ís not a great need of such rules for Vaisnavas, since this vrata is not mandatory for them. The  rules are thus given ín the Matsya Purāna by the Lord to  Bhīma (69.21-55): 'On Daśamī during the bright fortnight of Māgha one should rub the body with ghee and  then bathe with sesame-seed oil. Then, one should worship Visnu with the mantra Namo Nārāyanāya, the feet  with Krsnāya, the head with Sarvātmane, the throat with  Vaikunthaya, the chest with Srīvatsadhārine, the arms  with Sañkhine (Carrier of the conch), Cakrine (Carrier  of the disk), Gadine (Carrier of the club), Varadāya (Giver  of blessings), one after another and all with Nārāyanāya,  the belly with Dāmodarāya, the penis with Pañcaśarāya  (Carrier of five arrows), the thighs with Saubhāgya-māthāya (Churner of success), the knees with Bhūtadhārine  (maintainer of living beings), the shank with Nīlāya (Dark  one) and the feet with Viśvasrje namah (Obeisance to the  creator of all).
'The goddess of fortune should be worshipped with  Namas Tustyai (Satisfaction), Pustyai (Nourishment),  Vrstyai (Rain) and Hrstyai (Ecstasy). Garuda should always be worshipped with Namo Vihaganāthāya (Lord of  birds), Vāyuvegāya (Fleet as the wind), Paksine (Bird)  and Visapramāthine (Destroyer of poison).
`In this way Govinda should be worshipped together  with Umāpati and Ganeśa, with sandalwood paste, incense and different kinds of foodstuffs. Then one should  silently eat krsarā (a preparation of rice, peas and sesame)  sprinkled with gavya and milk with ghee. Then the wise  person should recite his mantra, take hold of a tooth-twig  of banyan or khādira (Acacia Catechu) and clean his  teeth facing east. After performing his duties at dusk he  should utter the following when the sun has set:
namo nārāyanāyeti tvam aha¥ śarana¥ gatah  ekādaśyā¥ nirāhārah samabhyarcya ca keśavam  rātriñ ca sakalā¥ sthitvā snānañ ca payasā tathā  sarpisā cāpi dahana¥ hutvā brāhmana-puñgavail7  sahaiva pundarīkāksa dvādaśyā¥ ksīra-bhojanam  karisyāmi yatātmāha¥ nirvighnenāstu tac ca me
"'Obeisance to Nārāyana! I have taken my refuge in You.  Self-restrained I will fast on Ekādaśī, and after worshipping Keśava I will stay up all night. I will bathe You with  milk and sacrifice with ghee and fire. O Lotus-eyed Lord,  together with excellent brāhmanas I will eat sweet rice on  Dvādaśī. May I accomplish this without hindrance!"
After saying this one should sleep on the ground. In  the morning one should listen to stories from the Itihāsas  and then offer libations to the manes according to the  rules. After bowing to the faultless Hrsīkeśa and seeing  the sun, a thoughtful person should have a pavillion constructed in front of his house. O lord of peoples, it should  be ten hastas (elbow to the tip of the middle finger) or  eight karas (the breadth of 24 fingers) long. Destroyer of  demons, one should construct a beautiful verandah of  four hastas, with a doorway of the same breadth.
'One should fashion a waterpot with twelve holes in  the bottom and fill it with water. Sitting on the skin of a  black antelope, one should keep the stream of water from  it on oneś head during all night. One who understands  the Uedas knows that by the many streams a manyfold  fruit will come. Therefore, o best of the Kurus, this stream  should be carried to the best of onés ability. In the same  way, one should pour a stream of milk on the head of  Visnu.
'Then one should make a sacrificial arena one aratni  (elbow to the tip of the little finger) long in the form of a  conical triangle with three girdles around it. Like those  who keep only one fire, brāhmanas devoted to Visnu  should then with mantras offer grains, ghee, sesame and  caru (rice, barley and pulse boiled with butter and milk)  with ghee from cow's milk. A stream of ghee, the size of  half a basket, should then be dropped into the fire.
`Great hero, one should establish 13 kumbhas with five  jewels inside, with different kinds of foodstuffs, decorated with white cloths and with vessels made of copper  on top of them. Facing the north a homa should be performed by four hotrs, four priests muttering prayers to  Rudra and devoted to the Yajur-veda and by four Vaisnavas, expert in the Sāma-veda. Before and afterwards,  prayers to avert misfortune should be recited.
`Then, without duplicity, these twelve brāhmanas should  be honoured with cloth, garlands, ointments, rings, bracelets, golden strings, garments and beds. The preceptor  should receive twice the amount of everything. In the morning, one should gather 13 faultless, beautiful milking cows  with golden faces, silvery hooves and milkpails of brass together with their calves, all sprinkled with sandalwood  paste. These should also be donated, o best of the Kurus.
After this all the brāhmanas should be given nice refreshments and be fed with different kinds of eatables.  One should oneself give up food not containing ksāra or  salt. Then one should, together with son and wife, follow  them with eight steps and declare:
priyatām atra deveśa keśava kleśanāśana
"`Please be happy here, o Lord of gods, Keśava, destroyer  of suffering!"
`Having said this, the wise should send the kumbhas,  cows, beds and clothes to the houses of the brāhmanas. In  the absence of many beds, one nicely decorated bed  should be given to the guru. O best of men, one who desires wealth should spend that day listening to the Itihāsas  and Purānas.`
GOVINDA DVADAŚI  phalgune dvādaśī śuklā yā pusyarksena samyutā  govinda-dvādasi nāma sā syād govinda-bhaktidā
The Dvādaśī in the bright fortnight of Phalguna, combit  with the asterism Pusya, is called Govinda Dvādaśī, and it  stows devotion to Govinda.
tasyām uposya vidhinā bhagavanta¥ prapūjayet 223  likhitah pāpanāśinyā¥ vidhir yo 'trāpi sa smrtah
At that time one should fast and worship the Lord according  to the rules. The rules written in connection with Pāpanāśini  Mahā-dvādaśī apply here as well.
THE GREATNESS OF GOVINDA DVADAŚI
In the Brahma Purāna, in a conversation between Vaśistha 224-225  and Māndhātr:`If Dvādaśī in the bright fortnight of Phalguna
is combined with Pusya, it is called Govinda Dvādaśī, and it  destroys great sin. A man who fasts according to the rules at  that time has his sins destroyed and attains the highest perfection, from where there is no return.`
āmardakī dvādaśīti loke khyāteyam eva hi 226  yogābhāve'tra tan-nāmni tadīyaikādaśī matā
yatra āmardakī-pūjā- vratam asyā¥ viśesatah
This Dvādaśī is also known amongst people as Amardakī  Dvādaśī. If there is no connection with Pusya, then the corresponding Ekādaśī is known by that name. The speciality of  this day is the vrata of honouring the myrobalan tree.
DDT: If the Dvādaśī is combined with Pusya it is necessary to fast on that day. Otherwise one should fast on  Ekādaśī, and also at that time perform the rituals such as  honouring the myrobalan tree.
RULES FOR AMARDAKI-VRATA
As said by Brahmā in the same book, in connection with the
greatness of Pāpanāśinī:`O king, in the month of Phalguna es- 227-228  pecially the vrata of Amardakī is said to be great. It is auspi
cious and it awards men the abode of Visnu: In the Skanda Purāna, Prabhāsa-khanda, in a discussion between Devī and Ma
heśvara (7.2.17.199-205): `In the bright fortnight of Phalguna  one should fast on Ekādaśī. Having bathed in a river, in a pond  or with water from a well or in the house, one should go to a  mountain or a forest were a myrobalan tree grows.
229-230 `When a tree appeared from churning the ocean of milk, it  was called "Amardakī" because of the rough handling (āmarda) of the gods and demons. This tree is also known as Śivā  and Laksmī, and it is honoured by the best of gods. The gods  headed by Brahmā all know this tree to be connected with  Visnu.
231-234. , Arriving there, one should worship Hari or Śiva at the root  of the tree with pure flowers, and then keep vigil during the  night. One should install a pot full of water with a vessel on  top, offer food made from havisya and a lamp according to the  rules. In this way, those devoted to listening to stories perform  the vigil and, while embodied, are freed from the sins of Kali,  born from the body. At the end of this body, again, they are all  honoured in the temple of Hari:
DAMANAKAROPANA DVADAŚI  328 caitrasya śukla-dvādaśyā¥ damanāropanotsavam  vidadhyāt tad-vidhir baudhāyānādy-ukto'tra likhyate
On the Dvādaśī of the bright fortnight of Caitra one should perform the celebration of offering a damana plant (Artemisia  Indica). The rules are given here, following the writings of Baudhāyāna and others.
madhoh sitaikadaśyāñ ca prātah-krtya¥ samāpya ca  gatvā damanakārāmā¥ tatrāśoka¥ smara¥ yajet
329 On the Ekādaśī of the bright fortnight of Caitra, one should  after performing the morning duties, enter a damanaka garden  and there worship Smara, the god of love, as an aśoka tree  ( Jonesia Asoka).
THE MANTRA
aśokāya namas tubhya¥ kāma-strī-śoka-nāśanam 330  śokārti¥ hara me nityam ānanda¥ janayasva me
`Obeisance to the aśoka tree, to you, remover of the sorrow of  love and women. Please always take away the pain of my sorrow and give me happiness!'
DDT: In the damanaka garden one should worship Smara  in the form of an aśoka-tree with aksata, sandalwood pulp,  and so on. This worship should be understood to be indeed of the Lord in the form of the god of love. Or then  the offering to the Lord is just made in the same way as  one would worship the god of love.
nesyāmi krsna-pūjārtham tva¥ krsna-prīti-kārakam 331  iti samprārthya natvā ca grhnīyād damana¥ śubham
`I will take you away for worshipping Krsna, for you give love  for Krsna'. Praying like this, one should bow down and take a  beautiful damana.
DDT:`Také: if one does not have a damanaka garden of  oneś own, one may take a plant one from someone else's.  `Beautiful' means that it should have very wonderful blossoms.
proksya tat pañca gavyena praksālyādbhih prapūjya ca 332  vastrenāccādya vedādi- ghosenagrham ānayet
The plant should be sprinkled with the five substances of the  cow and water. It should then be worshipped and covered with  a cloth. With the sound of recitations from the Uedas, and so  on, it should be brought home.
RULES FOR PRELIMINARY  PURIFICATION OF THE DAMANAKA
333 krsnasyāgre samuddhrtya sarvatobhadra-mandalam  nidhāya damana¥ tatra rātrau tad adhivāsayet
In front of Krsna a Sarvatobhadra mandala should be drawn.  The damana plant should be placed there, and in the evening  preliminary purification should be done.
DDT: The plant should be placed in a basket in the  mandala. After the duties of the evening and special worship of the Lord, adhivāsana or preliminary purification  should be performed.
THE MANTRA
334 pūjārtha¥ deva-devasya visnor laksmī-pateh prabhoh  damana tvam ihāgaccha sānnidhya¥ kuru te namah
O damana, please come here for the worship of the God of gods,  Visnu, Husband of Laksmī, the Lord. Please appear! Obeisance  to you.
335 sabīja¥ kāmadevañ ca tathā bhasma-śarīrakam  anañga¥ manmathañ caiva vasanta-sakham eva ca  smaran tatheksucāpañ ca puspabānañ ca pujayet
336 prāg-ādi-diksu ratyādhya¥ vidhivad damane kramāt
With the seed-mantra one should according to the rules in the  eight directions around the damana plant, beginning in the  east, worship Kāmadeva (the god of love), Bhasma-śarīraka  (whose body is ashes), Anañga (the bodiless), Manmatha (agitater of the mind), Vasanta-sakha (the friend of spring), Smara  (love), Iksucāpa (whose eyebrows are like bows) and Puspabāna (whose arrows are flowers), together with Rati.
DDT: One by one these eight forms of the god of love  should be worshipped with the Kāma seed-mantra around  the Damanaka. According to the ruleś means with sugar,  aksata, sandalwood pulp, etc. An example: `klīm drūī¥  kāmadevāya namah, drūīm ratyai namah'. Alternatively  one may say as when performing rituals such as the Keśava-nyāsa:`klī¥ kāmadevāya ratyai namah'.
astottara-śata¥ kāma- gāyatryā cābhimantrya tat 337  dattvā puspāñjali¥ kāma- deva¥ vandeta mantravat
Then one should read 1o8 Kāma-gāyatrīs over the plant, and  after offering a handful of flowers worship the god of love with  the following mantra:
namo śtu puspa-bānāya jagad-āhlāda-kārine 338  manmathāya jagannetre rati prīti-pradāyine
`Obeisance to him who carries flower-arrows, who gives joy to  the world, who agitates the mind, who is the leader of the world  and who bestows passion and satisfaction.
āmantrito śi deveśa purāna-purusottama 339  atas tvā¥ pūjayisyāmi sānnidhya¥ kuru keśava
`I call you, Lord of gods, oldest and highest person! I am going  to worship You, so please arrive, o Keśava!
nivedayāmy aha¥ tubhya¥ prātar damanaka¥ śubham 340  sarvathā sarvadā visno namas te śtu prasīda me
`In the morning I will offer You a beautiful damanaka. O Visnu, in all circumstances and at all times I bow to You. Be merciful unto me!'
ittham āmantrya deveśa¥ dattvā puspāñjali¥ punah 341  gīta-nrtyādinā rātrau kuryāj jāgarana¥ mudā
After praising the Lord of gods and after again offering a handful of flowers, one should happily keep vigil at night with song,  dance, and so forth.
DDT: The vigil should be performed before the Lord  seated in His swing. If one is personally not able, then one  should perform it through ones son or someone else, in  the place of the purification of the damana.
RULES FOR OFFERING THE DAMANAKA  342 prātah-snānādi nirvartya nitya pūjā¥ vidhāya ca  damanaropanārthañ ca mahā pūjā¥ samācaret
After performing the morning duties such as bathing and the  mandatory worship, one should offer elaborate worship in connection with offering the damana plant.
343 tato damanaka¥ bhaktyā pānibhyā¥ parigrhya ca  ghantādi-vādyaghosena śrīkrsnāya samarpayet
One should then take hold of the damanaka with both hands,  and to the accompaniment of the sound of bells and other instruments offer it to Srī Krsna.
DDT: `Offer' means that one should first offer a damanaka blossom to the head of the Lord, and then in a tasteful way to the blessed feet, and so on.
MANTRA FOR OFFERING THE DAMANAKA  344 deva-deva jagannātha vāñcbitārtba-pradāyaka
krtsnān pūraya me krsna kāmān kāmeśvarī-priya
`God of gods, master of the universe, giver of desired things, o  Krsna, o You who are dear to the goddess of love, please entirely  fulfill my desires!
DDT: `The goddess of love' means Rati. Krsna is called  dear to her as He is worshipped as the god of love. Alternatively, it refers to the giver of all love, goddess Laksmī,  or then to the fulfiller of all of Krsna's desires, Śrī Rādhā.
ida¥ damanaka¥ deva grhāna mad-anugrahāt 345  imā¥ sā¥vatsarī¥ pūjā¥ bhagavann iha pūraya
`Please accept this damanaka, Master, to favour me. O Lord,  please complete the worship of the year!'
tato dāmanakī¥ mālā¥ gandhādīni samarpya ca 346  gītādinotsava¥ krtvā śrī-krsna¥ prārthayed idam
Then one should offer a damanaka garland, sandelwood pulp  and so on. After a celebration with song, etc, one should pray  like this to Srī Krsna:
DDT: A damanaka garland' means a garland made of  damanaka blossoms. After offering it, one should offer  the five articles: sandelwood pulp, flowers, incense, lamps  and eatables. Then one should hold a celebration with  song, dance, etc, in honour of the festival of offering the  damanaka, and then pray.
mani-vidruma-mālābhir mandāra-kusumādibhih 347  iya¥ samvatsarī pūjā tavāstu garuda-dhvaja
`Together with garlands of pearls and coral, and flowers such  as those of the coral tree (Erythina Indica), this is the worship  of the year. May it be Yours, rider of Garuda!
DDT:`May this worship that I have done by offeringYou  a damanaka be like offering a garland of pearls and coral,  etc. Just as those things are dear to You, be pleased with  this also: This is the implied meaning.
vanamālā¥ yathā deva kaustubha¥ satata¥ hrdi 348  tadvad dāmanakī¥ mālā¥ pūjāñ ca hrdaye vaha
`O Lord, as You always carry a garland of forest flowers and the  Kaustubha jewel on Your chest, so also carry this damanaka garland, and my worship in Your heart'
bhagavanta¥ pranamyātha guru¥ sampūjya bhaktitah 349  sampūjya brāhmanān śaktyā bhuñjita saba bandhubhih
After bowing to the Lord, one should honour the guru with  devotion. After worshipping the brāhmanas as well as one can,  (350-351) one should eat together with friends.
352-353 As said by Brahmā in the Devī Purāna:'O son, in Caitra, etc,  one should perform worship according to the rules with sandalwood pulp, incense, arghya, foodstuffs and garlands of damanaka flowers. With a homa one should worship the Lord to attain all one's desires. Such a man will attain the fruit of bathing  at all holy places:





FROM VILĀSA XV  APPEARANCE OF THE LORD
FESTIVALS DURING  THE NEXT FIVE MONTHS
NIRJALA EKADAŚI
In the Padma Purāna (6.51.15, 19-25):`Bhīmasena said:"Grandfa- 19  ther what should I do, since I am unable to fast? O master, please  describe to me a single vrata which can give plenty of fruits!"
`SrīVyāsa said:"When the sun is in Taurus or Gemini during 20-22  Ekādaśī in the bright fortnight of the month of Jyaistha one
should fast diligently, avoiding water. The wise should avoid water, except when bathing or performing ācamana. Otherwise  one should not taste water, or the fast will be broken. A thoughtful person should zealously avoid water from sunrise to sunrise.  He will attain the fruit of the twelve Dvādaśīs.
DDT: `The twelve Dvādaśīs`: the eight Mahā-dvādaśīs  plus Śayanī-, Pārśva-parivartani- and Bodhinī Dvādaśī,  plus Bhaimī Dvādaśī. Otherwise it may mean the fruit of  all the Dvādaśīs during the twelve months of the year.
"`Then, on the pure morning on Dvādaśī, one should bathe and 23-25  according to the rules give water and gold to the twice born. O
master of the senses, after performing one's duties one should  eat together with brāhmanas. Bhīmasena, please listen to the  merit one gains by doing this. Son, on this day one attains without a doubt the fruit of all the other Ekādaśīs of the year! This  Keśava, the carrier of the conch, disk and club, has told me:"
DDT: The merit is especially great since it is a great effort  to refrain from drinking water in the middle of summer.
Furthermore (6.51.30-33): `Tiger amongst men, when a man 26-28  celebrates this day it brings him wealth, grain, merit, sons, for
tune and happiness. I am telling you the truth! The terrible,  angry messengers of Yama, with enormous, lusty bodies, carrying sticks and ropes, do not bind such a man. That Vaisnava  is at the time of death led to the abode of Visnu by persons  wearing yellow garments, holding conches and disks, fleet as  the mind:
29-31 And also (6.51.39-42): `That foremost of Vaisnavas who  follows the rule of refraining from water gains the merit of ten  million donations of gold with every three hours. The bathing,  giving in charity, muttering of mantras and sacrifices a man  does on this Dvādaśī will all be immortal. This is the statement of Krsna. O king, what shall I say about other observances  than Nirjala Dvādaśī? One who fully fasts and observes the  rules attains the abode of Visnu:
32-34 Similarly: `Bhīmasena, , those who perform this pure  Nirjala Ekādaśī all liberate a hundred relatives. Together with  them he will be led to the temple of Vāsudeva.' And also (6.51.  50): `Those who do not fast on this day commit suicide. They  are full of sin, they behave badly and are evil. There is no doubt  about this: Furthermore (6.51.55): `Both one who listens to this  with devotion and one who declares this to others will attain  heaven. Do not doubt this!'
DDT: The verse beginning with `Those who' shows that  this vrata is mandatory.
THE RULES FOR NIRJALA EKADAŚI
35 yathā prāg-likhita¥ krtvā sañkalpa¥ niyamā¥ vrate  jalam ādāya grhnīyan mantrenānena vaisnavah
After performing the duties explained earlier on, the Vaisnava  should, holding water, state the declaration and the rules for  the vrata with this mantra:
DDT: Having stated the mandatoriness of the vrata he  now writes in the next nine verses about the rules for the
vrata, following the statements of the Uttara-khanda of  the Bhavisya Purāna.'The duties explained earlier oń refers to the rules for Daśamī, etc, that have already been  explained (12.2-22).
THE MANTRA OF RULES
ekādaśyā¥ nirāhāro varjayisyāmi vai jalam 36  keśava-prīnanārthāya atyanta-damanena ca
`To please Keśava I will with great self-restraint fast on Ekādaśī and refrain from water.'
varjayec cāmbv aho-rātra¥ vinā cācamanārthakam 37  vinā ca prāśana¥ pādodakasyātyantapāvanam
One should avoid water during both day and night, except water  for ācamana and water that has washed His feet, for it is greatly  purifying.
DDT: One should refrain from water both during day  and night. In this verse he states that water for ācamana  and bathing and water that has bathed the Lord's feet  should not be avoided, since there will always otherwise  be the fault of impurity. Now, `avoid water, except when  bathing or performing ācamaná was stated earlier (15.21),  but foot-bathing water was not mentioned. The reason is  that it is greatly purifying', it is even more purifying than  ācamana. The mandatoriness of ācamana has been established earlier (3.304-305)•
ekādaśyā¥ niśāyān tu nityapūjā¥ vidhāya hi 38  haimī¥ traivikramī¥ mūrti¥ snāpayet paya-ādibhih
After performing one's prescribed duties in the evening of the  Ekādaśī, one should bathe a golden form of Trivikrama with  milk and so on.
vastrādika¥ samarpyāthābhyarcya gandhādibhiś ca tām 39  pranamyajāgara¥ kuryāt tad-agre nartanādinā
One should offer Him clothes, etc, and worship Him with  sandalwood-paste and so forth. After paying obeisances one  should by dancing and so on keep vigil in front of Him.
40 prātah-snānādi nirvartya ta¥ trivikramam arcayet
One should bathe, etc, in the morning and then worship Trivikrama.
41 śaktyāmbukumbhān viprebhyo dadyād gandhādy-alañkrtān  According to one's means, one should donate to the brāhmanas kumbhas with water, decorated with sandalwood-paste  and so on.
THE CORRESPONDING MANTRA  42 deva-deva hrsīkeśa samsārārnava-tāraka  jalakumbha-pradānena yasyāmi paramā¥ gatim
'God of gods, Hrsīkeśa, rescuer from the ocean of birth and  death! By giving,away this waterpot I will go to the highest  destination:
43 dadyāc ca kanaka¥ chatra¥ vastra yugmam apānakau  jalapātrāni divyāni vibhāve sati vaisnavah
The Vaisnava should donate gold, a parasol, two cloths, sandals or just wonderful waterpots.
44 śaktyā viprān bhojayitvā pītvā bhrātrkarāj jalam  svaya¥ vā pīya maunī san bhuñjīta saha bandhubhih
After feeding the brāhmanas according to one's means, one  should silently drink water from one's brothers hand, or from  oneś own. Then one should eat together with friends.
ŚAYANA DVADAŚI
āsādha-śukla-dvādaśyā¥ harau śiśisyisau sati 45  vaisnavah pārana¥ krtvā saptamudrāś ca dhārayet
On Dvādaśī during the bright fortnight of Asādha, when Hari  wishes to sleep, the Vaisnava should, after breaking the fast,  brand seven marks on his body.
brāhmanah ksatriyo vaiśyah śūdraś caikāntitarddhaye 46  kurvann ātmārpana¥ tapta- mudrābhir deham añkayet
To increase their singlemindedness, brāhmanas, ksatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras should surrender their self by branding the  body with red-hot marks.
DDT: In this verse he declares that all varnas should  carry the branded marks. This one does to perfect ones  'singlemindednesś or exclusive devotion to the blessed  Lord, like a bull marked with Sivás liñga.`Surrender their  self' or self-surrender is a specific form of devotion. That  also brāhmanas should wear the marks will be duly  elaborated on further on.
In connection with the red-hot marks it is said in the Varāha 47  Purāna: Just to announce their connection, men should carry
the marks of the disk, etc, just like a chaste wife is decorated with  bracelets and so forth'.
DDT: With this statement of Varāha he establishes that  by accepting the red-hot marks one attains the perfection  of singlemindedness. Announcing the ćonnection' means  to declare that one belongs to the Lord. Another reading  says'announce their connection with the Highest Lord'.  The example given is that of a chaste wife who shows that  she has a living husband by carrying bracelets, but who  also wears the ornaments to please her husband. That this  is a sign of devotion is evident.
THE MANDATORINESS OF ACCEPTING
THE MARKS OF THE DISK AND SO ON  48 In the Vāyu Purāna:'To attain the abode of Hari, Vaisnavas of all  varnas should carry the branded marks of the disk and so forth:
DDT: He begins establishing the mandatoriness by the  strenght of the commands in this verse up to verse 59.  Amongst all varnas, the Vaisnava should carry the marks,  because the marks pertain mostly to them. This can be  seen from verse the statement`to perfect his Vaisnavism'  in verse 58. Otherwise, `of all varnas' can be understood in  connection with 'the abode of Hari', the attainment of  which is the perfection of all. Also in this case it is shown  that all varnas should carry the marks.
49-51 In the Brahmānda Purāna: `O king, having fashioned metallic  marks of the disk and so forth, the Vaisnava should brand his  own body.' The Nārada Pañcarātra describes the disk thus:  `One should wear a branded mark of Hari's Sudarśana disk,  hexagonal, having twelve spokes and encircled by three lines:  In the Garuda Purāna, in a discussion between the Lord and  Garuda in connection with the branded marks:'Garuda, this is a  rule for brāhmanas, ksatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras: for all varnas,  without exeptions:
DDT:`Since the body of a brāhmana never should be injured, this ritual pertains to others than brāhmanaśsuch a doubt should be discarded. This is quite clearly  shown in the verse from the Garuda Purāna and in the  following six verses.
52-55 In the Padma Purāna (6.66.81):As the Agnihotra and studying  the Vedas are mandatory duties for a brāhmana, so is accepting the branded marks of the disk and so on: Furthermore, in  the same book, Uttara-khanda, in a discussion between Śiva  and Umā:`To remove all sin, a brāhmana should brand his upper arms with marks of the conch and disk, heated in a sacrificial fire. He should undertake the brahminical duty of wearing
the five weapons beginning with disk and conch according to  the rules: Also (6.244.40):A brāhmana who does not wear the  disk according to the rules becomes degraded:
Likewise (6.244.41,44): `One should never accept food 56-58  from a brāhmana who has performed thousands of observ
ances, knows all the Uedas and other scriptures, but who does  not wear the disk according to the rules. Such a brāhmana becomes fallen: Moreover (6.244.48-49):'To perfect his śrauta  and smārta duties, and also his mantra, a brāhmana should  mark himself with red-hot brands according to the rules. One  should wear the mark of the disk to attain eligibility for worshipping Hari, to perfect his Vaisnavism, and especially to perfect his devotion:
Also: 'Brāhmanas, and especially Vaisnavas, should wear 59-60  the disk, conch and so forth just like they wear the sacred
tread: In the Srī Sudarśa Sruti (5-6):`One who is truly attentive to the rules of the foremost of the praised ones, makes a  disk with fire. Fire is thousand-spoked, thousand-spoked is the  felly. One whose body is branded with the felly attains sāyujya,  he attains sālokya:
DDT: One who makes a disk with fire attains`sāyujya' or  eternal, close proximity with the Lord and'sālokyá, residence in the world of the Lord. Because of the connection  with fire, there is no fault, rather there is a good quality.  This he shows with the statement beginning with'fire is'.  `Thousand-spoked' means the disk. Fire is purifying while  the disk is most purifying. They are therefore non-different. The implied meaning is that there is no fault in this  ritual, but it is extremely good. Now, since the disk is  present in this one place, wearing the mark is real. This  mark is non-different from the disk itself. This he states  with the phrase`thousand-spoked is the felly'. The`felly' is  the outer rim of the disk, and that mark is indeed the  whole disk itself.
'Who carries the branded disk on his body gets the strength of 61  the gods, of immortal Visnu. Shaking off sin, he proceeds to  heaven, where the ascetics with subdued passions enter.'
DDT:'The strength of the godś means their protection.  `Heaveń is the place where there is no suffering, the highest abode.
62 In the appendix to the Rg Veda:'The raw person whose body  is not branded does not enjoy that. Enjoying together certainly  those who wear completely dwell there. Thus the Yajuh:
DDT: Since their bodies are not branded they are`raw' or  have the intelligence of children. Because of this, they do  not attain `that', the abode beyond words. Instead of énjoying together' another reading (rv 9.83.1) has 'all the  cooked oneś, meaning all those whose bodies are branded.  In the Aśvalāyana-śākhā of the Rg Veda:
63 `Living in the ocean of birth, the best of men,  the ancients, carry on their shoulders and elsewhere  the marks of the lotus and disk of eminent Visnu.
They accept the branded marks of the other weapons:  DDT:`The best of meń means the topmost saints.These  persons are liberated while living, and therefore they are  most ancient of all. That they 'accept' the marks of the  other weapons, such as the club, means that they carry  them also on their bodies.
64 In the appendix to the Chāndogya Upanisad: 'Yajñavalkya  said: "To benefit his self, this man should worship Hari with  love. He should place the marks of the foremost of praised  ones on his limbs with fire. Thus the śruti of Śātātapa:"
In the appendix to the Atharva Veda, in connection with  the branded marks:
65 `With arms branded with Sudarśana,  the devoted gods have gone to heaven.  Marked like this, the Manus create the peoples,
branded, the brāhmanas carry it:  DDT:`It means the disk Sudarśana.
In connection with the branded marks, Śrī Śiva says in the 66  Padma Purāna: 'A brāhmana who is marked with the disk of  Visnu should be worshipped with all rites, but one without the
disk of Visnu should be zealously avoided:
DDT: Having confirmed the mandatoriness through the  orders of scripture by showing the excellence of carrying  these marks, he now establishes it fully by showing that  non-observance will result in sin.'With all riteś means  with śrāddha and so forth.
In the Nārada Purāna, in connection with the branded marks:  'Whose bodies are devoid of the mark of Śrī Krsna's disk like crematoriums are those men or women.
O king, seeing such a person
one should bathe fully dressed and quickly worship Hari!'
bahvaś ca veńkatācārya- pāda-prabhrtibhir budhaih 68  śrutayah srnrtayo 'py atra vikhyātā likhitāh parāh
Wise men such as the honourable Ācārya Ueńkata have in this  connection collected many other famous statements of the śrutí  and smrti.
DDT: Veńkatācārya of the Śrī Sampradāya is foremost  of these knowers of the śruti and smrti. The implied  meaning is that since those statements are widely known  they have not been collected here.
THE FAULT OF NOT  RESPECTING THE MARKS
In the Padma Purāna:`If one happens to see the face of that low- 69  est of men, who having seen the branded mark of the disk blasphemes it, one should look at the suń.
DDT: Now, while the necessity has been established, he  further strenghtens the mandatoriness of this observance
by showing in this verse and the following two the fault of  those who ridicule it through ignorance.
70-71 Also in the Agni Purāna, in the lament of the brāhmana whose  son had been killed by Daśaratha: `Did I consider the form of  Hari as made of stone? Did I at some time see a Vaisnava, whose  body was decorated with branded marks, on the road and disrespect him in my mind? By what deed comes this sorrow over  my son?'
DDT: This is the lament of the brāhmana whose son, by  the name Sravana, had been killed by Daśaratha. This is  the story: Thinking he was an elephant he had chased,  king Daśaratha shot Śravana on hearing him coming. Following the dying son's words, the king brought a pot of water to his blind parents. Worried, the father adressed the  silent Daśaratha.`Śravana! Why did you delay? Why do  you not speak?' He replied:`I am Daśaratha, killer of your  son: Hearing this, the brāhmana fell unconscious, and regaining consciousness after a long time lamented in many  ways.
THE GREATNESS OF WEARING  THE BRANDED MARKS
72-74 In the Garuda Purāna: `Even if someone is impure, badly behaved and has given up all religious duties, if he is marked by  the branded conch and disk he purifies an assembly.' In the  Varāha Purāna, in connection with the branded marks:`Whether  someone decorated with the disk resides in a pure land or one  of barbarians, three yojanas in all directions from him is My  field on earth: In the Brahmānda Purāna:`If a Vaisnava brands  his body with all the weapons of Visnu, he will go to the highest abode:
75-79 Likewise, in the Padma Purāna (6.244.31-34, 37, 38): `One  who wears the pure marks branded with fire on his shoulders  gives up terrible hell and proceeds to the abode of Visnu. One  whose body is branded with a disk kept in a sacrificial fire, attains by this the holy places and sacrifices. There is no doubt
about it! A brāhmana who has marked his shoulders with the  red-hot brand of the disk should mutter his mantra. By this he  will become liberated from birth and death. Those who decorate their shoulders with the branded mark of the disk, all become liberated from sin and attain the highest abode of Visnu:  Furthermore (6.244.55): `Those branded with the disk of  Visnu are spiritual, great souls, but those without the disk of  Visnu are known as materialistic and fallen:
ittham nisedha-vacana¥ nirmūla¥ sad-anādrtam 80  samūla¥ yac ca tat samyag vidhy-abhāvādi-tatparam
Now, the statements prohibiting this observance are baseless  and rejected by the wise, and those statements that are based  on scripture pertain to abandoning the rules, etc.
DDT: Having everywhere settled the wearing of  branded marks, he now skillfully in writing refutes the  statements opposing it. The statements prohibiting this  observance that generally are heard from the Smārtas  are indeed `baseless', because they cannot be found anywhere in old books such as the śrutis, smrtis, Purānas or  Itihāsas. Now, someone may say 'well, in some places  they can be found: To this he replies with `rejected by  the wise', to confirm that such statements are fabricated  by persons connected to wicked Smārtas. Those statements are the talk of madmen, like `to the chaste wife  who does not commit adultery an infirm next birth is  certainly giveń .
Still, in the Brahma-gītā the following clear statement  is given:`O best of the twiceborn, in the age of Kali misled  heretics always carry the marks of the vajra, disk and so  forth on their bodies: This objection he answers with  'those statements that are based on scripturé . The opposing statements based on scripture are aimed at wearing  the marks in a way that is against the rules.'Etć means  that they may also pertain to persons that are not Vaisnavas. This is the meaning of the verse from the Brahmagītā: Since the vajra is also mentioned, wearing the disk  and so forth together with the vajra is forbidden. In this  way the scripturally based statements that prohibit carry
ing the marks should be understood to refer to an incorrect wearing of marks.
Whenever possible, in such scripturally based statements one should try to ascertain the subject. If this is  not possible one should have recourse to understanding  that there is a difference between Vaisnavas and nonVaisnavas in this matter. This is the conclusion.
RULES FOR WEARING  THE BRANDED MARKS
81 tapta-mudrādhāranārtham upacārais tu pañcabhih  krsnam abhyarcya sampūjya cakra-śańkhau tathā namet
For wearing the branded marks, one should worship Krsna with  five articles, then the disk and conch. Then one should bow to  them.
THE MANTRA
82 sudarśana namas te śtu pāñcajanya namo śtu te  'Obeisance to Sudarśana! Obeisance to Pāñcajanya!'  83 agnim abhyarcya mūlena hutvā cājyāhutīh kratī
cakra-śańkhaugadādīni śastrāny agnau pratāpayet
After worshipping the fire, the sacrificer should offer oblations  of ghee with the root mantra. Then the weapons - the disk,  conch, club and so forth - should be heated in the fire.
DDT:`Root mantrá means his own mantra. One should  offer as many oblations as one is able.
84 tat-tan-mantrair athāvāhya tāny abhyarcya pranamya ca  guru¥ krsnañ ca samvandya bhaktyā vijñāpayed idam  Having invited them with their respective mantras, one should  worship them and bow to them. Having fully praised the guru  and Krsna, one should with devotion pray like this:
ucchista-bhojanād eva kińkarah śaranāgatah 85  tapta-cakra-darādīni tavāńkān īśa dhāraye
`By eating the remnants of Your food, I have become Your servant. I have taken shelter of You. O Lord, I shall wear Your  marks, beginning with the branded disk and conch:
MANTRAS FOR INVITING  THE DISK AND SO ON
om namo bhagavate sudarśanāya nirnāśita-sakala-ripu-dhvajāya 86  bhagavan-nārāyana-karāmbhoruha-sparśa-durlalitāya  'Om. Obeisance to the glorious Sudarśana, marked with all the  destroyed enemies, spoiled by the touch of the lotus hand of  Lord Nārāyana!'
ehy ehi tvam sahasrāra cakrarāja sudarśana 87  yajña-bhāga¥ pragrhyasva pūjāñ caiva namo namah
`Come, come, thousand-spoked one, king of disks, Sudarśana!  Please accept a part of this sacrifice and worship. Obeisance,  obeisance to you:
o¥ namo bhagavate pāñcajanyāya visnu-śańkhāya 88  gambhīra-dhīra-dhvany-ākulīkrta-kaurava-vāhinī-nāthāya  trirekhā-daksināvartāya tripraśastāya
`Om. Obeisance to glorious Pāñcajanya, Visnu's conch, whose  deep and steady sound confuses the leader of the Kauravaś army,  who has three lines, turns to the right and is thrice auspicious!'
ehy ehi pāñcajanya tva¥ nārāyana-kara-sthita 89  yajña-bhāga¥ pragrhyasva pūjāñ caiva namo namah
o¥ ra¥ na¥ ma¥ na¥ pāñcajanyāya namah 90
'Come, come, Pāñcajanya, you who are in the hand of Nārāyana! Please accept a part of this sacrifice and worship. Obeisance, obeisance to you. Om! Ram! Nam! Mam! Nam! Obeisance to Pāñcajanya:
91 o¥ namo bhagavate khadgāya nandakāya  trailokya-pāvitryāya sakala-surāsura-sundarī-netrotpalārcitāya
`O¥. Obeisance to the glorious sword Nandaka, purifier of  the three worlds, worshipped by the eyes of all divine and demoniac beauties!'
92 ehy ehi khadga-ratna tva¥ nandakākhya surārcita  yajña-bhāga¥ pragrhyasva pūjāñ caiva namo namah  93 o¥ khadgāya namah
`Come, come, jewel amongst swords, you who are called Nandaka, worshipped by gods! Please accept a part of this sacrifice  and worship. Obeisance, obeisance to you. Om! Obeisance to  the sword:
94 o¥ namo bhagavatyai kaumodakyai gadāyai  dānavendra-nisūdanāyai bhagavad-bhattāraka-vāsudeva-lālitāyai  `Om. Obeisance to the glorious club Kaumodakī, killer of the  leader of the demons, cherished by the Lord and Master Vāsudeva!'
95 ehy ehi tva¥ gade devi kaumodaky āyudheśvari  yajña-bhāga¥ pragrhyasva pūjāñ caiva namo namah
96 on ra¥ kha¥ ca¥ pha¥ śa¥ gadāyai namah
`Come, come, you goddess, o club, Kaumodakī, queen of weapons! Please accept a part of this sacrifice and worship. Obeisance, obeisance to you. Om! Ram! Kham! Cam! Pham! Sam!  Obeisance to the club:
96 eva¥ padmāya namah, saśarāya sārañgāya namah
In the same way:`Obeisance to the lotus, obeisance to the bow  and arrow.'
THE MANTRA FOR WEARING THE MARKS  sudarśana mahājvāla sūrya-koti-saura-prabhā
ajñānāndhasya me nitya¥ visnor mārga¥ pradarśaya
`Sudarsana, greatly flaming, splendid like ten million suns! Always show me, who am blinded by ignorance, the path of Visnu:  And also:
pāñcajanya nija-dhvāna- dhvasta-pātaka-sañcaya 98  pāhi mām pāpinam ghora- samsārārnava-pātinam
`Pāñcajanya, destroying multitudes of sins by your sound! Please  protect me, a sinner, fallen into the ocean of the terrible cycle  of birth and death:
imam uccārayan mantra¥ daksinādi-kramena tu 99  bhujuyoś cakra-pūrvāni krsna-śastrāni dhārayet
Uttering this mantra, one should one by one place the weapons of Krsna, beginning with the disk, on the right arm and so  forth.
DDT: Arm' means shoulder. `Beginning with the disk':  first one should place the disk and then the others such as  the conch. About this he writes `on the right arm and so  forth'. First one should mark the right shoulder, then the  left, and so on. The specific details will be given in a quotation from the Varāha Purāna below (15.103-104).
kalatrādi parīvārān nijān sarvāmś ca vaisnavah 100  bhagavaty arpayan tapta- mudrābhis tābhir añkayet
Offering them to the Lord, the Vaisnava should brand his wife,  etc, companions and everything with these red-hot marks.  DDT:`Offering' means presenting with the mentality`they  belong to you'. As it is said in the Śrīmad Bhāgavatam  (11.3.28): `Wives, sons, homes, life airs: all this is an offer
ing to the Highest'. The offering of wife, etc, should be  done one after another.'These' refer to the worshipped  forms of the disk and so forth.
As it said in the Varāha Purāna:`With red-hot brands one should 101-104  place marks on one's own shoulders, the wife, children, servants,
animals and on oneś wealth: Also:`Having out of iron fashioned  marks of the five weapons according to the rules, the knower of
mantras should place them, one by one with their respective  mantra. On the forehead one should wear the club, on the top of  the head the bow and arrow, the sword Nandaka in the middle of  the chest and the disk and conch on the arms: Furthermore: A  brāhmana should wear Sudarśana on his right arm and the  conch on his left. This is the knowledge of knowers of Brahman:
DDT: `Iroń denotes also gold and so forth, as will be seen  further on (15.105). Since the bow and arrow are companions, they are counted as one. In this way there are five  weapons.
THE MATERIAL OF THE MODELS  OF THE DISK AND SO FORTH
105 In the Navapraśna Pañcarātra:'Having fashioned a disk of gold,  silver, copper, brass or iron, the wise man should brand himself  in the proper way'.
106 evam eva prabodhanyā¥ dvādaśyā¥ bhagavat-paraih  tapta-mudrā dhruva¥ dhāryā dvārakāya¥ viśesatah
In the same way, those devoted to the Lord should certainly  also on Prabodhanī Dvādaśī accept branded marks, especially  in Dvārakā.
DDT:'In Dvārakā': because of the special strength of the  disk in its own holy place, or because there is a special  greatness in accepting branded marks there.
THE FESTIVAL OF LYING DOWN  ON THE OCEAN OF MILK
 107 tato nīrājya krsnan tu narayānena vaisnavah  samam gitādi ghosena nayet punya¥ jalaśayam
Then, after ārātrika, the Vaisnava should with song and music  with a hand-drawn carriage lead Krsna to an auspicious reservoir of water.
atha puspāñjali¥ dattvā yānād uttārya ca prabhum 108  samprārthya hasta¥ dattvā ca tīre samupaveśayet
One should then offer the Lord handfuls of flowers and remove  Him from the carriage. After offering prayers one should offer  Him one's hand and invite Him to the bank.
dhautāñghri-pānir ācantah krtvā sañkalpam ātmani 109  deve ca nyasam ācarya snāpayet ta¥ yathāvidhi
After performing ācamana, one should with clean body and  hands utter the declaration, perform nyasa on oneself and the  Lord, and then bathe Him according to the rules.
DDT: One should state a suitable declaration following  the ones given earlier on.
samprārthya jala-madhye ta¥ deva¥ samsnāpayet sukham 110  gandha-puspādibhiś cātha mahāpūjā¥ samācaret
One should offer prayers and then happily bathe the Lord in  the water. Then one should perform opulent worship with  sandalwood-paste, flowers, and so on.
DDT: One should offer prayers like 'All glory to Mahāvisnu! Please protect the world!'
THE MANTRA FOR SLEEP
śese paryañka-varye śmin phanā-mani ganāmale m  śvetadvīpāntare deva kuru nidrā¥ namo śtv iti
`O Lord, in the middle of Svetadvīpa, please fall asleep on the  eminent couch of Śesa with unlimited pure bejewelled hoods:  THE MANTRA OF PRAYER
supte tvayi jagannātha jagat supta¥ bhaved idam 112  vibuddhe tu vibudhyeta prasanno me bhavācyuta
'Lord of the universe, when You sleep, the whole world sleeps;  when you awake, it also awakes. Be pleased with me, Infallible  one!'
113 ity āśasya prabhor agre grhnīyān niyama¥ vratī  caturmāsesu kartavya¥ krsna-bhakti-vivrddhaye
After praying like this in front of the Lord, the vrata-performer  should accept some restrictions for the four months of the  rainy period to increase his devotion to Krsna.
DDT: Why should a Vaisnava accept restrictions during  the rainy period? He gives the answer with'to increase his  devotion to Krsna: One incurs sin by not, and also gains a  special thing by doing so, devotion. This is the conclusion.  PAVITRAROPANA DVADAŚI
śravanasya site pakse dvādaśyā¥ vaisnavair mudā  kartavyah krsnadevasya pavitrāropanotsavah
168 On Dvādaśī during the bright fortnight of Śravana Vaisnavas  should happily perform the festival of offering Lord Krsna a cord.  MANDATORINESS OF THE FESTIVAL
169-yo In the appendix to the Rg Ueda: `One who makes a cord has  bathed in all holy places and been initiated into all sacrifices.  He becomes dear to Hari. The demons will steal away the fruit  of a whole year of worship, etc, of one who does not perform  the festival according to the rules given in the scriptures:
DDT: First he shows that the festival is mandatory since  it is dear to Krsna, and then with the next three verses  (yo-ya) he shows that it is also mandatory since nonperformance will result in sin.'Etć means muttering mantras, sacrifices and so on.
y In the Yoga-sāra, in the story of the birth of the cord, Rudra gives  this boon to Pavitra, the king of snakes:`The fruit of muttering
mantras, sacrifices and so on will be destroyed for those who do  not think much of you, who are so respected by me:
DDT: The story of the cord: A great snake by the name  Srī Pavitra, a brother of Vāsuki, king of snakes, worshipped the blessed Śiva with devotion until he became  pleased. Then he asked him for the following benediction:"May I become an ornament around your neck:' Śiva  was greatly pleased and said: "Become an ornament  around the necks of all the gods! All their devotees  should also fashion a cord with your form and offer it to  their own god. Otherwise they will incur a great sin:'
In the Visnu-rahasya:`O best of sages, a whole year of worship 172-173  will become fruitless for one who does not offer the cord ac
cording to the rules. Therefore, men who are devoted to Visnu  should year after year offer the cord with devotion to Hari:  DDT: `Year after year' means that since it is continual it is  mandatory,just like it is said that one should'spring after  spring sacrifice with light. Here it is also shown that it is  mandatory for those who are devoted to Visnu', Vaisnavas.
THE GREATNESS OF OFFERING THE CORD  Baudhāyana says: As long as one honours the cord, one's dura- 174-176  tion of life, freedom from disease and majesty will all abundantly
increase: In the Mahā-sarñhitā: `O twice-born one, the worship  that a brāhmana has performed during a year is completed by  the offering of the cord. Thus spoke Lord Hari: In the Visnurahasya:`Offering the cord to Visnu brings enjoyment, liberation,  fame for woman and man, merit, happiness, glory and riches:
DDT:'Fame for woman and mań means fame for both  husband and wife, or then for both women and men. It  indicates that offering the cord to Visnu is meant also for  Vaisnava women.
`It is the merit of all merits, indeed a destroyer of all sin. There- 177-178  fore offering the cord is known as most pure. The fruit one at
tains by devotedly fully worshipping Janārdana during a whole  year, one attains by simply offering the cord!'
179-180 And also: `Since it causes sin to disappear and orders the  cutting of attachment to matter, it is called cord. It is known as  the effulgence of Brahman. It is known by the name of Visnu  among the people. It is indeed the Lord of sacrifices, the Lord  of rites in the form of a thread:
DDT: Here he gives an etymology for the word ćord'. In  the following two verses he wishes to show a special  greatness of the cord: the Blessed Lord who wears a garland of forest flowers, and so on, is non-different from his  secondary members.
181 `That threefold thread is called Nārāyana. It is known as the self  of the three gods, three Uedas and three-lettered syllable Aum'.  DDT: The`threefold thread' consists of three threads. The  reason for this is then given: it is the self of Brahmā, Visnu
and Śiva, etc. Even though the cord is eternally liberated in  the world of Vaikuntha by its being a decoration of the  Lord, with regard to Śrī Maheśvara, it appears as a decoration on the form of the Lord, in the form of a threefold  thread made by Vaisnavas with special devotion, just like  the Lord appears in an installed image. This is the understanding. Therefore the mantra for installation is:
visnulokāt pavitrādyāgaccha
`O cord, please today come from the world of Visnu!` (15.207)  182 tatra baudhāyanādy-uktah pavitrāropane vidhih  sammato vidusā¥ krsnārcane yo `tra sa likhyate
The rules for offering the cord have been explained in the writings of Baudhāyana and others. Here those rules for worshipping Krsna that all the knowers have agreed on are noted.
DDT: Because of different disciplic successions and  schools there are many different rules. The rules of those  who are conversant with the scriptures are written here.
RULES FOR OFFERING THE CORD
sauvarrtai rājatais tāmraih ksaumaih sūtrais tu pādmikaih 183  kārpāsair vā pavitrānīsyante kāśaih kuśair api
One should fashion strings of gold, silver, copper, silk, lotus fibres, cotton or kuśa grass (Saccharum Spontaneum).
DDT: These materials are listed in order of preference.
tatra kārpāsika¥ sūtra¥ brāhmanī-kartita¥ śubham 184  ānīya trigunī-krtya punas trigunayet śucih
If the thread is of cotton, it should be fine and woven by a  brāhmanī. After getting the thread, a pure person should make  it threefold, and then threefold again.
DDT:`Brāhmanī' means a virgin daughter of a brāhmana  or a widow full of good qualities, but not a śūdra or someone with bad behaviour.`Fine' means that it should be excellent and not be too thick.'A pure persoń means someone who is pure by having taken bath, etc.
pañca gavyena tat proksya praksālya śucināmbunā 185  mūlenascottaraśatam mantrenāthābhimantrayet
It should be sprinkled with the five substances of the cow (milk,  yoghurt, ghee, cow dung and cow urine) and then with pure  water. Then one should recite 108 root-mantras over it.
trīni sāstaśatenāsya tasyārdhenāsya cārdhatah 186  jānūrunābhidaghnāni pavitrāny ācaret prabhoh
One should fashion three cords for the Lord, having 108, half  of that and again half of that threads and reaching to the  knees, thighs and navel.
DDT: A Vaisnava with a sacred thread should in a pure  place tie three cords one by one: a large, a middle and a  small one. The large one should consist of 108 nine-fold  threads, the middle one of half of that, 5q, and the small
one of 27. The lenght for the large is that it should reach  to the knees of the form of the Lord, the middle one to  the thighs and the small one to the navel.
187 sattri¥śad granthayas tesām ādye kāryās tu madhyame  caturvi¥śair ante ca dvādaśa granthayo budhaih
A wise person should make 36 knots on the first one, 24 on the  middle and 12 on the last.
DDT: One should tie the knots at equal distances. The  `first' corresponds with the large, the `last with the small.  188 arigustha-parva-mātrān tu kuryād granthim athottame
tad-ardha¥ madhyame kuryāt tad-ardhañ ca kanīyasī
One should leave a distance of one thumb between each knot  on the large, half of that one the middle one, and half of that  on the small one.
DDT:`One thumb' indicates the lenght of a thumb of the  form of the Lord so that a small form also gets a small  cord, and since different worshippers will have thumbs of  different lenghts anyway.
189 granthīh kurvīta sarvatra suvrttān sumanoharān  na vai visama-sańkhyākān granthīn kurvīta kutracit
The knots should everywhere be made beautifully round and enchanting. One should, however, never make an uneven number  of knots.
DDT: `Everywhere means on all the cords. `Never' refers  to the cords of the associates, etc.
190 astottara-sahasrena tat-sūtrasya pavitrakam  astottaraśata granthi- vana-mālākhyam ācaret
One should make a cord called Vanamālā with 1oo8 threads  and 108 knots.
191 ārabhya mukuta¥ yā tu sūtrair viracitā śubhā  āpādalambinī mālā vanamālā prakīrtitā
p beautiful garland made of threads, beginning at the crown  and reaching down to the feet, is called a Vanamālā.
kuryād gandha-pavitrañ ca sūtrair dvādaśahhih śubhaih 192  aratni pranita¥ tac ca dvādaśa-granthika¥ krtī
One should fashion a perfume-cord of twelve splendid threads,  reaching from the elbow to the little finger and having twelve  knots.
DDT: This cord of nine-fold thread is meant for applying  perfume.
pavitrāni parivāra- devatānā¥ samācaret I93  sūtrais tair udusańkhyākaih kalāsańkhyārka-sańkhyakaih
One should make cords for the associate divinities with 27, 16  and 12 threads.
DDT: One should tie three cords for the associate divinities also, one large, one medium and one small.
tesu granthīn yathāśobha¥ baddhvā vahner guror api I94  saptavi¥śatibhih sūtraih sadvi¥śatibhir ātmanah
On them one should tie knots to create a beautiful appearance.  For the fire and the guru one should make cords of 27 threads,  and to oneself of 26.
yathāsambhavam anyesā¥ pavitrāni ca kārayet I95  sampādayec ca sarvāni śobhanāny eva yatnatah
As far as possible, one should have cords made for others also.  One should endeavour to make all of them beautiful.
As it is said:'By giving impure cords one will get an impure 196  fruit. Therefore, with great devotion one should purify the cord:  rañjayitvātha kāśmirāguru gorocanādibhih 197
vastrenācchādya patale sthāpayet tāni vainave
One should dye them with saffron, aloe, gorocana and so on.  Then they should be placed in a basket of bamboo, which should  be covered with a cloth.
DDT: And so oń refers to substances such as camphor. If  one is unable to use these, one can also simply use ku¥ku­ ma, or íf one is unable to use even that, turmeric and so on.  198 krtvā krtya¥ daśamyāñ ca pavitrāropanāya hi
krsna¥ vijñāpya tad-rātri¥ yathā prāg-likhita¥ nayet
After performing one's duties on Daśamī, one should inform  Krsna of the offering of the cord, and then spend the night as  previously described.
DDT: Now he describes the observances for the three  days of the festival of offering the cord. He begins with  Daśamī.As previously described' means as was explained  in the section dealing with rules for Daśamī (13.2-18).  That basically means to eat only once, give up the use of a  tooth-twig and instead clean the teeth by doing ācamana  twice, perform the rituals at dusk and then worship the  Lord. After offering a handful of flowers, one should declare the following to the Lord:
tava yāga¥ karisye `ha¥ pavitra-mayam acyuta  āmantrito `si bhagavan parivāra yuto mayā
`I will perform the sacrifice of the cord to You, Infallible  One. Together with Your associates, You are invited by  me, Lord!'
After praying like this, one should spend the night as  earlier described (13.22) by observing brahmacārya and  sleeping on the ground, and so on.
Now, some are of the opinion that one should spend  the night of Daśamī, perform the duties for the morning  of Ekādaśī, and only then declare the offering of the cord  as mentioned above. Then one should arrange the paraphernalia for offering the cords as well as one is able and  bow to the guru. In his house and on his order one should  then fashion the cords. The activities such as fashioning  the cords on this Ekādaśī should be understood to pertain to those who have the means.
I99 ekādaśyā¥ prabhāte ca nitya-krtya¥ samāpya hi  devālayam upaskrtya mandala¥ racayet śubham
Having performed the morning duties on Ekādaśī, one should  decorate the temple and construct a beautiful mandala.
DDT: In this verse and upto verse 224 he describes the  duties on Ekādaśī.`The morning dutieś refer to bathing  and so on. One should decorate the temple with ointments, canopies, etc. The'beautiful mandala' refers to mandalas such as the Sarvatobhadra.
In the opinion of some, this can be added: `One should  first worship the doorkeepers and then enter the sacrifical  arena. One should then make a braid out of 36 blades of  darbha-grass with the length from elbow to the tip of the  middle finger, and purify it with root-mantras and the  five substances of the cow Then one should perform bhūta-śuddhi (purification of the elements), smear the braid  with the five substances of a cow and sprinkle the whole  sacrificial arena with it. After this, one should bow to the  guru and then, following one's own rulebooks, prepare  nyāsa-water, mutter the Nrsi¥ha root-mantra (ksrau¥)  over some mustard seeds and scatter them in the ten directions. One should consider them to form a wall all  around.
`Then one should according to the rules please a wellbehaved Vaisnava, learned in the Uedas and Uedāńgas,  who will perform the sacrifice. He should, according to  the rules of the scriptures and those pertaining to the particular house, offer a8 or 1o8 oblations and pour the leftover ghee into the throw-out pot to bless the cord. Then  the sacrificer should perform nyāsa following the rules,  and after performing this occasional elaborate worship,  begin the great worship pertaining to the festival of offering the cord:
krtvā krsnasya nityārca¥ pavitrāropanārthakam 200  pūjā¥ viśesatah krtvā krsna¥ vyāpayed idam
After performing the daily duties for Krsna, those who desire  to perform the offering of the cord should perform special  worship, and then pray to Krsna like this:
kriyā-lopa-vidhātārtha¥ yat tvayā vihita¥ prabho 201  mayaitat kriyate deva tava tustyai pavitrakam
'O Master, o Lord, this cord that You have made for correcting  deficiencies in the worship, I have now fashioned for Your satisfaction:
202 na me vighno bhavet tv atra kuru nātha dayā¥ mayi  sarvathā sarvadā visno mama tvā¥ paramā gatih
'May there be no obstacles for me. O Master, be merciful to me!  At all times and everywhere, You are my highest goal, Visnu:  And so on.
DDT: And so oń refers to the following, which also  should also be saíd:
upavāsa-vratena tvā¥ tosayāmi jagat pate  kāma-krodhādayo hy ete na me syur vrata ghātakāh  adya prabhrti deveśa yāvad vaiśesika¥ dinam
tāvad raksā tvayā kāryā sarvasyāsya namo `stu te  'With this vrata of fasting I will please You, Lord of the  world! May lust, anger, etc not break my vrata. Starting  today, until the appointed day, please protect all of this. I  bow to You:
Since these verses are common to all vratas, they have  not been mentioned in the main text.
203 devasya sarvato nyasyed danta-kāstha¥ jala¥ kuśān  mrttikāñ ca haridrāñ ca kumkumā¥ rocanāni ca  204 upānakau sitacchatra¥ cāmara¥ vyajana¥ tathā
yava-vrihy-ādi-dhanyāni yathāsthāna¥ prthak prthak  Around the Lord one should place in suitable places, one by  one, a tooth-twig, water, kuśa-grass, earth, turmeric, ku¥kuma,  gorocana, sandals, a white parasol, a yak-tail whisk, a peacockfeather fan, barley, rice and other kinds of grains.
DDT: In these two verses he describes the preparation  for adhivāsana, the preliminary activities. Verses 205-223  describe how the adhivāsana should be performed.
kumbha¥ śuddhāmbunāpurya sarvatobhadra-mandale 205  devāgrato nidhāyāsmin pavitrāny adhivāsayet
After placing a pot filled with pure water in a Sarvatobhadra  mandala in front of the Lord, one should perform the preliminary purification of the cords.
DDT: The cords should be in a basket on top of the pot.  PRELIMINARY PURIFICATION  OF THE CORDS
bhagavat-puratah-sthāni patalasthāni pūjayan 206  ādāv āvāhayen mūla- yujā tan-manunā budhah
Worshipping them in the basket in front of the Lord, the wise  person should first invite them with the root mantra and with  this mantra:
om sā¥vatsarasya yāgasya pavitrī-karanāya bhoh 207  visnu-lokāt pavitrādya āgaccheha namo `stu te
'Om. O cord, for purifying the worship of the whole year, please  come today from the word of Visnu. Obeisance to you!'
tesv āvāhya yathā-sthāna¥ brahmādyā devatās tatah 208  tat-tan-mantraih sannidhāpyāksata gandhādinārcayet
Having invited into the cords in their own places the divinities  such as Brahmā, one should establish them with their own mantras, and then worship them with aksata, sandalwood pulp and  so forth.
DDT: One should invite the presiding divinities of the  cords with the āvāhana-mudrā and their own mantras,  then establish them, ask them to come near with the  sannidhī-karana-mudrā, protect them with the cakramudrā, make them nectarean with the dhenu-mudrā and  then worship them.And so forth' refers to things such as  flowers, incense, lamps, foodstuffs and betel.
THE DIVINITIES OF THE CORDS  209 brahma-visnu-mahādevās trisūtrī-devatāh smrtāh
pranavo vāyu-vahnī ca brahmā nāgah śaśī ravih  śivaś ca viśve-devāś ca nava-sūtry-adhidevatāh
Brahmā, Visnu and Mahādeva are known as the divinities of  the threefold string. Pranava Om, Vāyu, Agni, Brahmā, Nāga,  Candra, Sūrya, Śiva and the Viśvedevas are the gods of the ninefold string.
210 kriyā ca paurusī vīrā caturthī caparājitā  jayā ca vijayā caiva muktidā ca sadāśivā  211 manomayī tu navamī daśamī sarvatomukhī
granthīnā¥ devatās tv etās tatra tatra nivedayet
Kriyā, Paurusī, Vīrā, Aparājitā, Jayā, Vijayā, Muktidā, Sadāśivā, Manomayī and Sarvatomukhī: these ten goddesses of the  knots should be invited one by one.
THE MANTRAS FOR INVITING  212 o¥ sarvābharana-citrāñga sarva-deva-namaskrta  lāvanya-rūpa viśvātman jyestha-sūtra¥ samāśraya
`Om. Self of all, whose limbs are splendid with all kinds of ornaments, to whom all gods bow down, whose form consists of  beauty, please enter into the big cord:
213 om sarva-laksmī-kara śrīśa sarva-jñāna-rasātmaka  nivrttarūpa viśvātman madhya-sūtra¥ samāśraya
`Om. Self of all, the origin of all wealth, Lord of Srī, whose self  is bliss and all knowledge, whose form is beyond this world,  please enter the middle cord:
214 o¥ ativega marud yone purusātman divaspate  kanīyo he prabho deva tejasā sūtram āśraya
`Om. Master, exceedingly swift, origin of the wind, self of man,  lord of heaven, o Lord, please enter the small cord with Your  effulgence: And so on.
DDT: And so on' refers to inviting Prakrti, the presiding  divinity for the Vanamālā. This is the mantra:
prakrte tva¥ jaganmūrte sarva-Iāvanya-dāyini  śrī-sūtre nityakalyāni sānnidhya¥ kuru te namah  `Prakrti, you whose form is the world, giver of all beauty,  always auspicious, please enter this beautiful cord. Obeisance to you:
Since this mantra is according to the opinion of only  some people, it has not been clearly given in the text.
yatra mantro na varteta tat-tan-nāmaiva tatra ca 215  namo `ntah sacaturthīka ūhyah prāg-likhanān manuh
Where no mantra has been given, one should use the name of  the divinity in the dative case, followed by namah, and utter  the mantra as has been described before.
DDT: What should be the mantras for the others? That  is described here. An example: `om pranavāya namah:
atha krsna-karāmhhoje patta-sūtrena nirmitam 216  vitasti-mātra¥ badhnīyād doraka¥ mangalātmakam
Then one should tie an auspicious string made of cotton thread,  the lenght of the distance between the extended thumb and the  little finger, to the lotus hand of Krsna.
THE MANTRA
o¥ samvatsara-krtārcāyah sampūrna-phalado śi yat 217  pavitrī-karanāya tat kautuka¥ dhara te namah
'Since You give the fruit of completing the worship of the year,  please carry this thread for purity. Obeisance to You!'
218 tato gandha pavitrań ca grhītvā dhūpita¥ budhah  bhagavanta¥ namaskrtya bhaktyā samprārthayed idam
The wise person should then take the fumigated perfume-cord,  bow to the Lord, and with devotion pray like this:
DDT: The perfume-cord should be fumigated with the  incense of aloe, etc.
219 āmantrito `si deveśa sārdha¥ deva ganeśvaraih  mantreśair lokapālaiś ca sahitah paricārakaih
`I call You, Lord of gods, together with the leaders of the groups  of gods, the masters of the mantras, protectors of the worlds,  and Your associates!'
220 āgaccha bhagavann īśa vidhi-sampūrna-kāraka  prātas tvā¥ pūjayisyāmi sānnidhya¥ kuru keśava
`Come, o Lord, controller, completer of all rules. In the morning I will worship You. Please come, o Keśava!'
And also:
221 visnu-tejodbhava¥ ramya¥ sarva-pātaka-nāśanam  sarva-kāma prada¥ deva tavāńga¥ dhārayāmy aham
'O Lord, I carry a delightful part of You, born from the effulgence of Visnu, a destroyer of all sins and giver of all desires:  222 anena manunā vidvāt mūla-samputitena hi
dadyād gandha-pavitran tat śrī krsna-caranābjayol7
With this mantra one should according to the rules and muttering the root-mantra offer the perfume-cord to the lotus feet  of Srī Krsna.
223 nīrājya deva¥ stutvā ca dattvā puspāńjali¥ tatah  tat pavitrāni tat-kumbham apy astra-manunāthavā  nrsimha-manunā rakset kavacenāvagunthayet
After waving lamps before the Lord, reciting hymns and offering  handfuls of flowers, the cords and the pot should be protected
with the Astra-mantra (phat) or the Nrsimha-mantra (ksraum).  The pot should then be covered with a kavaca.
gīta-nrtyādinā kuryād vidhivaj jāgara¥ niśi 224  According to the rules one should keep vigil at night with song,  dance, etc.
DDT:'Etc' means reciting the Purānas and so forth:According to the rules' means according to the rules for the vigil  given earlier on (I3.6I-92), such as reading the Purānas and  singing and waving lamps before the Lord every third hour.  OFFERING THE CORD
prātah-krtyāni nirvartya nitya-pūjārń vidhāya ca 225  viśesato `rcayed deva¥ pavitrāni ca pūjayet
After performing the duties of the morning and the mandatory worship, one should perform special worship of the Lord  and then worship the cords.
DDT: In this verse up to verse 23q he describes the observances on Dvādaśī.
mahā-vāditra ghosena nāma-sańkīrtanotsavaih 226  mūla-samputitenaiva pavitrāny arpayet kramāt
With the loud sound of instruments, a festival of congregational  chanting of the Lord's name and muttering the root-mantra, the  cords should be offered one by one.
DDT:'One by oné : beginning with the big cord and with  the most senior persons present.
vaksyamānena mantrena bhaktyā krsnāya vaisnava)' 227  pūjā¥ krtvā parīvāra- devānā¥ tāny athārpayet
After worshipping Krsna by uttering the following mantra  with devotion, the Vaisnava should offer cords to the associate  divinites also.
228 krsna krsna namas tubhya¥ grhāneda¥ pavitrakam  pavitrī-karanārthāya varsa-pūjā phala-pradā
`Krsna! Krsna! Obeisance to You! Please accept this cord for the  sake of purification. Bestow the fruit of the year's worship!'
229 pavitraka¥ kurusvādya yan mayā duskrta¥ krtam  śuddho bhavāmy aha¥ deva tvat prasadāj janārdana
`O Lord, whatever I have done wrongly, please purify that today.  By your mercy I become pure, o Janārdana!'
mahā pūjā¥ tatah krtvā stutvā natvārthayet prabhum
After the performing elaborate worship, one should bow to the  Lord and request Him like this:
230 vanamālā¥ yathā deva kaustubha¥ satata¥ hrdi  tadvat pavitra¥ tantuñ ca pūjāñ ca hrdaye vaha
`O Lord, as You always carry a garland of forest flowers and the  Kaustubha jewel on Your chest, please also carry this cord, and  my worship in Your heart:
231 jānatājānatā vāpi na krta¥ yat tavārcanam  kena vā vighnadosena paripūrna¥ tad astu me
`The worship of You that I have neglected to perform, knowingly or unknowingly, through whatever kind of fault of interruption, may that be completed for me.`
232 tathāgni¥ vidhinābhyarcya pavitra¥ tasya cārpayet  krsne nivedayan mantra- hīnam ity ādinā krtam
One should then honour the fire according to the rules and  then offer it its cord. Then one should offer all that has been  done to Krsna with the`mantra-hīnarri-prayer.
DDT: After performing a homa, one should offer a cord  to the fire with the root-mantra. Then everything should  be offered to Krsna with mantras such as
mantra-hīna¥ kriya-hīna¥ bhakti-hīna¥ janārdana  yat pūjita¥ mayā deva paripūrna¥ tad astu me
'O Lord, o Janārdana, whatever that has been lacking in  mantra, ritual or devotion in my worship, may that be  completed for me:
guruñ ca bhaktyā sampūjya pavitra¥ gurave `rpayet 233  vaisnavebhyah pavitrāni dattvaika¥ dhārayet svayam
Having honoured the guru, one should offer him his cord. Then  the Vaisnavas should be given cords, and then one should oneself wear one.
sampūjya vaisnavān viprān śaktyā sa¥bbojya bandhubhih 234  sama¥ mahā-prasadānna¥ sukha¥ bhuñjīta vaisnavah
After worshipping the Vaisnavas and feeding the brāhmanas  as well as one is able, the Vaisnava should happily eat Mahāprasāda food together with friends.
RULES FOR REMOVING THE CORDS
In the Tantras According to time, place and circumstances, the 235-237  Lord should carry the cords made of strings a month, a fort
night, three nights or one day and night. At the time of bathing, they should be removed. They should be sprinkled with  water and then again placed on the Lord. At the end, the Lord  should be especially worshipped with flowers and sandalwood  pulp, offered different kinds of foodstuffs, and then the cords  should be removed with this mantra:
o¥ samvatsarī¥ śubhā¥ pūjā¥ sampādya vidhivan mama 238  vrajedānī¥ pavitra tva¥ visnu-loka¥ visarjitam
`Om. O cord, having made my yearly worship conform to the  rules and auspicious, now you will be removed. Return to the  abode of Visnu!'
yāvad deve pavitrāni tāvat tisthet samāhitah 239  brahmacārī havisyāśī deva-pūjā-parāyanah
As long as the Lord wears the cords, one should concentratedly  live in celibacy, eat only havisya and be devoted to the worship of  the Lord.
THE FRUIT OF THE VRATA
240 As said in the work of Baudhāyana:`One who thus follows all  the rules and acts like this year after year, will no doubt attain  to the highest abode, where dwells the Man-lion'.
PARŚVA-PARIVARTANA DVADAŚI  543 bhadrasya śukla-dvādaśyā¥ śayanotsavavat prabhoh  kali-dānotsava¥ kuryād vaisnavaih saha vaisnavaih
On Dvādaśī in the bright fortnight of Bhadra, a Vaisnava should  together with Vaisnavas celebrate the festival of turning over,  just like the festival of the Lord's going to sleep.
544-545 In the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya Purāna:`When Ekādaśī in the bright fortnight of the month of Bhadra arrives,  Visnu turns over. It destroys great sin. Having led the Lord to  the bank of a reservoir of water, and having fully worshipped  Him, one should turn Him over on His right side:
DDT: Even though the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya  Purāna says`Ekādaśī', it should be understood as'Dvādaśī'.  The statement of the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya Purāna should be understood to teach the non-difference of  Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī.
`One should turn Him over' means that earlier He  slept on His left side, but from now on He sleeps on His  right side.
THE MANTRA OF REQUESTING  546 deva deva jagannātha yogīgamya nirañjana  katidānam kurusvādya māsi bhadrapade śubhe
`Lord, Lord, Master of the universe! Untainted one, attainable  by yogīs, please today in the pure month of Bhadra turn over.'  mahāpūjā¥ tatah krtvā vaisnavān paritosya ca 547
deva¥ svamandire nītvā yathā-pūrvam niveśayet
Then one should offer elaborate worship and please the Vaisnavas. Having led the Lord back to His temple, He should be  returned to the same position as before.
ŚRAVANA DVADAŚI
bhadrasya śukla-dvādaśyā¥ yuktāyā¥ śravanena hi 548  uposya sańgame snātvā deva¥ vāmanam arcayet
If Dvādaśī in the bright fortnight of Bhadra is connected with  the asterism Sravana, one should fast, bathe at a confluence of  rivers and worship Lord Vāmana.
THE GREATNESS OF ŚRAVANA DVĀDAŚI
māsi bhadrapade śuklā dvādaśī śravanānvitā 549  mahatī dvādaśī jñeyā upavāse mahāphalā
arcayitvācyuta¥ bhaktyā labhet punya¥ daśābdikam
Dvādaśī connected with Sravana during the bright fortnight of  the month of Bhadra is called Mahatī Dvādaśī. Fasting during  that time is greatly meritorious.One who worships the Infallible  one with devotion at that time attains the merit of ten years.
DDT:`The merit of ten yearś means the merit one gains  by worshipping the Lord during ten years.
phala¥ datta-hutānāñ ca tasyā¥ laksa guna¥ bhavet 550  The fruit of of donations and sacrifices is multiplied by a hun
dred thousand on this day.
In the Skanda Purāna: Dvādaśī in the bright fortnight of 551-554  the month of Bhadra combined with Śravana is known as Ma
hatī Dvādaśī. Fasting on this day brings great merit. One who  fasts and bathes in an auspicious confluence of rivers on this  day gains the fruit of twelve Dvādaśīs. If this day also falls on a  Wednesday, its is Atyanta-mahatī Dvādaśī, and whatever given  in charity on that day becomes imperishable. The fruit of donations and sacrifices is multiplied by a hundred thousand on  this day.'
555-556 In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna, in a conversation between  a father and son:`When the day of Hari during the bright fortnight of Bhadra is combined with Śravana and falls on a Wednesday, the worshippable Vāmana fulfills all pure desires in  one's mind. The confluence of all rivers appear in a confluence  on that day.
557-560 `Ekādaśī in the bright fortnight of Bhadra leads to heaven,  in the dark to destruction of sin. In Phālguna it liberates men  even from the sin of killing a brāhmana. This glorious tithi,  however, bestows great merit at a confluence. It destroys all the  sins of those who celebrate it: And also: All the holy places  meet at a confluence, and all the gods congregate on earth during this glorious day. In this way this secret of all the Purānas  is told. One who worships Vāmana at a confluence will not be  born as a ghost:
561-562 In the Visnu-dharmottara Purāna (1.60.1-3): `Srī Paraśurāma said:"Is there any way in which those who are unable  to fast can by just one day of fasting gain great fruit? Great  god, fixed in vratas, please tell me that!" Srī Sañkara replied:"O  Rāma, knower of duties, one who fasts, bathes and worships  Janārdana on Mahatī Dvādaśī combined with the asterism  Śravana, easily attains the fruit of the twelve Dvādaśīs!"'
563-566 Furthermore (1.60.5-8): `Rāma, when Dvādaśī combined  with Sravana falls on a Wednesday, it is called Atyanta-mahatī  Dvādaśī. O descendant of Bhrgu, bathing, muttering mantras,  sacrificies, charity, Śrāddha-ceremonies and worship of the  Lord lead all to liberation on this day. Rāma, one who bathes  in any confluence on that day without a doubt attains the fruit  of bathing in the Gangā. During Śravana all confluences al
ways award enormous merit, and especially so on Dvādaśī,  and even more so when combined with a Wednesday.'
In the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya Purāna, Yudhisthira 567-570  says (4.75.1-4): `O Highest Lord, Sinless One, please tell me
about one meritorious Dvādaśī for those who are not able to  always fast: Śrī Krsna replied:"Dvādaśī together with Śravana  in the bright fortnight of Bhadra bestows all pleasures. The  merit of fasting at that time is very great. One who fasts and  bathes at the confluence of rivers attains the fruit of bathing in  the Gañgā. Do not doubt this! When Dvādaśī combined with  Sravana falls on a Wednesday, it is called Atīva-mahatī. Everything given away on that day becomes eternal: "
Also, in the same book, in the story of the merchant 57I-574  (4.75.68-71):At the connection of Śravana and Dvādaśī he wor
shipped Janārdana, fasted, controlled his senses, gave gifts to  the brāhmanas and bathed at the confluence of great rivers. At  the time of death he attained the highest destination, difficult  to attain for anyone, where the trees bestow all desires, the rivers are of rice boiled in sweet milk and the enchanting lakes are  filled with cooling, clear water. Having reached that land, the  greatly fortunate merchant, bedecked with ornaments of pure  gold, happily enjoyed in the company of divine ladies for a  whole kalpa:
Moreover, at the end (4.76.65-67): `On Dvādaśī con- 575-577  nected with Sravana and Wednesday, giving away water from a  confluence of rivers and great amounts of food is auspicious.
It is the highest rule of fasting. O best of kings, Sagara, Kukutstha, Dhundhumāra, Gādhi and many others attained all  their desires through this Dvādaśī. A Dvādaśī in Bhadra that  falls on a Wednesday and even half the time is connected with  Sravana, is called Jayā by the sages. One who with great endeavour fully fasts on that day attains mystic abilities and  perfection:
DDT:'Perfectioń means liberation or Śrī Vaikuntha.
RULES FOR WORSHIPPING ŚRI VAMANA  629 natvā gurum anujñāpya paścān niyamam ācaret
na hi sidhyed guror bhakti¥ niyamañ ca vinā phalam
Having bowed to the guru, one should enquire from him and  then accept rules, for the fruit will not appear without devotion to the guru and to injunctions.
DDT: One should bow to oneś own guru, or if he is not  present, to a brāhmana spiritual master.`Then': as is said  in the Skanda Purāna in connection with the Jayantīvrata (13.510): 'First one should go to the house of the  guru and then follow rules. One should put one's head to  his feet and touch them with oneś head. With hands  folded in supplication one should then ask the guru thus:  "Best of the brāhmanas, o master, please give me the rules  for Dvādaśī!"' The`rules'refer to declaring the vrata and so  forth. As has been said: 'through rules one attains the  fruit; without rules there will be no auspiciousness'.
THE MANTRA OF RESTRICTIONS  630 ekādaśyā¥ nirāhārah sthitvā caivāpare 'hani  bhoksye śrīvāmanānanta śaranāgata-vatsala
'O Śrī Vāmana, Endless One, tender to surrendered ones! I will  remain fasting on Ekādaśī and eat on the next day.'
631 ekādaśyā rājanyā¥ vā dvādaśyā¥ cārcayet prabhum
On the night of Ekādaśī or on Dvādaśī one should worship  the Lord.
DDT: If there is a risk that the Dvādaśī may pass before  one has had time to break the fast, one should worship  the Lord during the night. This is the conclusion.
632 svarna-rūpya-maye pātre tāmra-vamśa-maye 'pi vā  kundikā¥ sthāpayet pārśve chatrikā pādukās tathā  śubhāś ca vainavī¥ yasthim aksa-sūtra¥ pavitrakam
One should establish a small kumbha with a pot of gold, silver,  copper or bamboo, a parasol and sandals on the side, a splendid stick of bamboo and a rosary of aksa beads (Eleocarpus  Ganitrus).
DDT: The materials mentioned for the pot are given in  order of preference. For the establishment of the kumbha  one should follow all the rules given earlier, for example  in connection with the Vijayā-vrata (13.495-499)• Whatever is specific for this vrata will be mentioned here.
puspa gandhaih phalair dhūpair vāmana¥ cārcayed dharim 633  nānā-vidhaiś ca naivedyair hhaksya-bhogyair gudaudanaih
jāgara¥ niśi kurvīta gīta-vādyādi-nartanaih
One should then worship Hari Vāmana with flowers, sandalwood paste, fruits, incense, different kinds of eatables, palatable foods and sweets. At night one should keep vigil with  song, music and dancing.
evam ārādhya deveśa¥ prabhāte vimale sati 634  ādāv arghya¥ pradātavya¥ paścād deva¥ prapūjayet
nārikelena śubhrena dadyād arghyañ ca pūrvavat
At the pure sunrise one should worship the Lord of gods. First  one should offer arghya and then worship the Lord. The arghya  should be offered with a pure coconut, as previously described.
DDT: As previously described' means with flowers and  so on and tied to a conchshell.
THE MANTRA FOR OFFERING ARGHYA  vāmanāya namas tubhya¥ krānta-tribhuvanāya ca 635  grhānārghya¥ mayā datta¥ vāmanāya namas tu te
vāmanāya arghya¥ namah
'Obeisance to You, Vāmana, who strode across three worlds!  Please accept this arghya, offered by me. Obeisance to Vāmana,  toYou! Arghya. Obeisance to Vāmana.'
636 matsya¥ kūrma¥ varāhañ ca nārasirivañ ca vāmanam  rāma¥ rāmañ ca krsnañ ca kramād dvau buddha-kalkinau
637 pādayor jānunor guhye nābhyām urasi-vaksayoh  bhujayor murdhni sarvāngesv arcayed āyudhāni ca
Matsya, Kūrma, Varāha, Nrsimha, Vāmana, Paraśurāma, Rāma, Krsna and Buddha and Kalki: these should all be worshipped one after the other on the feet, knees, private part, navel, chest, neck, arms, head and all the limbs. The weapons  should also be worshipped.
DDT: Here he gives the special mantras and mode of  worship. Buddha and Kalki should be worshipped as one  person on all the limbs, since they differ from the others  by uprooting the deceit of men. For this reason they are  listed as a pair. In the opinion of some others, the two  Rāmas should be grouped together. In this manner the  rules for worship are quite diverse. One should follow  those taught in one's own disciplic succession.
An example of how to use the names: o¥ matsyāya  namah pādayoh, `Obeisance to Matsya at the feet: The  other mantras follow in the same way. The weapons  should be worshipped with the mantra o¥ āyudhebhyo  namah,`Obeisance to the weapons:
638 mahāpujān tatah krtvā go-mahī-kāñcanādikam  śaktyācāryāya dātavya¥ brāhmanebhyaś ca mantratah
After thus performing opulent worship, one should according  to one's means with a mantra offer the preceptor and the brāhmanas cows, land, gold and so forth.
639 brāhmanaś cāpi mantrena pratigrhnāti mantravit  dadāti mantrato hy eva dātā bhakti-samanvitah
The brāhmana, knowing mantras, receives with a mantra, for  with a mantra the giver offers it, full of devotion.
THE MANTRA FOR GIVING
vāmano buddhido dātā dravyastho vāmanah svayam 640  vārnanaś ca pratigrāhī tena me vāmane ratih
'Vāmana, giver of knowledge, is the giver. Vāmana himself resides in the gift, and Vāmana is also the receiver. May I by this  attain love for Vāmana!'
THE MANTRA FOR RECEIVING
vāmanah pratigrhnāti vāmano 'pi dadāti ca 641  vāmanas tārako dvābhyā¥ teneda¥ vāmane namah
' Vāmana is the receiver and Vāmana is also the giver. Vāmana is  the liberator of both, therefore here is obeisance to Vāmana!'
evā¥ krtvā vidhānena bhojana¥ prsad-ājyakam 642  pūrva¥ dadyād brāhmanebhyah paścād bhuñjīta bandhubhih
Then one should prepare food with ghee mixed ín yoghurt according to the rules. First one should offer it to the brāhmanas,  and then one should oneself eat together with friends.
yad vāmana purāne ca yad bhavisyottare vratam 643  vāmanasyodita¥ tasyānusārāl likhita¥ tv idam
This has been written following whatever has been said about  the vrata of Vāmana in the Vāmana and Bhavisya Purānas.
DDT: The Vāmana Purāna contains the parts about  Sravana Dvādaśī. In the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya  Purāna (4.75) the Lord Himself explains the Vāmana  and Sravana Dvādaśī-vratas to Yudhisthira. The description of the Vāmana-vrata here is based on that. By regarding both books as one no disrespect is shown to either one. This is the implied meaning.
In the Brahma-vaivarta Purāna: After accepting the rules, one 644-648  should go to a confluence of rivers. Having fashioned a Vāmana
of some gold according to one's means, one should place the  Lord on a costly kumbha. One should then bathe Him in a  golden bowl and worship the Lord of the worlds with these  mantras: Om Vāmanāya Namah for the feet, Dāmodarāya for  the hip, Śrīpataye for the thighs, Kāmadevāya for the private  parts, Viśvadhārine for the belly, Yoganāthāya for the heart,  Śrīpataye for the neck, Pańkajāksāya (Lotus-eyed one) for the  face and Sarvātmane for the head. After worshipping like this,  one should dress the Guru of the worlds in garments and then  with devotion offer arghya with coconuts and other fruits. This  is the mantra:
649 o¥ namo namas te govinda budha-śravana-samjñaka  aghaugha-sarilksaya¥ krtvā preta-moksa prado bhava  "`Obeisance, obeisance to You, Govinda, known as Wednesday
and Sravana! Please destroy all sins and give liberation from  ghostly existence:'
650-653 `One should now give away parasols, sandals, cows and  waterpots especially to the oldest brāhmana, saying "May Vāmana be pleased". According to one's means, one should give  gifts to the brāhmanas and the elders. At night one should perform the vigil according to the rules with song and recitations  from scripture. With great faith one should pass the night  without winking. On the morning of Dvādaśī, one should feed  brāhmanas and then oneself break the fast. One who does all  this with faith will attain the fruit:
THE GREATNESS OF THIS VRATA  654-656 In the same book: `For one who performs this vrata on the day  of Vijayā in the age of Kali, nothing is difficult to attain, neither in this world nor in the next. A great man who gives away  the fruit of this vrata to his ancestor is a saviour of the family.  From the position of an ancestor or even from debt one attains  liberation. Nothing more purifying than this is known, nothing equal or greater than the Vijayā-vrata described here:
In the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya Purāna: `Hear me de- 657-660  scribe the merit of a vrata on this day. O best of kings, one will at
tain the abode of Visnu and enjoy there during four yugas times  seven times seven, for eternal time. In this world, o king, one will  cause fear in all enemies, give away elephants, horses, chariots and  palanquins in charity, enjoy without envy, have a most beautiful  body and live a long life without disease. Surrounded by children  and grandchildren, one will live a hundred years:




FROM VILĀSA XVI  DEAR TO DAMODARA  FESTIVALS IN THE MONTH OF KARTTIKA
PRABODHANI DVADAŚI
śayanyām iva krtvāsyā¥ ksīrambhodhi-mahotsavam 273  prabodhya krsna¥ sampūjya vidhinārohayed ratham
As on Śayana, one should perform a festival at the ocean of milk  on this day. After awakening Krsna and fully worshipping Him  according to the rules, He should be placed on a cart.
THE MANDATORINESS OF PRABODHANI
In the Skanda Purāna it is said: All the merit a man on earth 274  has acquired since birth becomes useless if he does not celebrate
the day of awakening.'
DDT: This verse is meant to indicate the mandatoriness  of also the chariot festival and so on.
THE GREATNESS OF PRABODHANI
In the same book (2.4.33.1-8):`The greatness of Prabodhanī 275-279  destroys sin and increases one's merit. It bestows liberation
upon the intelligent performers. Listen, best of the sages!  Until Hari-bodhanī in Kārttika, the burner of sin, appears,  Bhāgirathī Gańgā is useless on earth, o best of the brāhmanas. Until the tithi of Visnu, Hari-bodhanī, comes in Kārttika, all the holy places, oceans and lakes are useless. A man  who fasts on one Prabodhanī attains the fruit of a thousand  Vājapeya-sacrifices and a hundred horse sacrifices! O brāhmana, no matter how difficult oneś desire is to fulfil in the  three worlds of moving and non-moving creatures, Haribodhanī awards it:
280-282 `O brāhmana, even to someone who fasts simply in sport  Hari-bodhanī affords opulence, progeny, merit, majesty and  happiness. Powerful sins, great as mount Meru, Hari-bodhanī  burns up by one's fasting even once. Whatever fruit one can attain by giving all kinds of charity on earth, that Hari-bodhanī  awards by one's fasting even once:
283-286 Furthermore:`Best of sages, one who performs Prabodhanī  in Kārttika awakens his good fortune. By this his family is indeed cleansed. Whatever holy places there are in the three  worlds all reside in the house of one who performs Prabodhanī! Give up all duties and please the carrier of the disk by  fully fasting on Hari-bodhanī Ekādaśī in Kārttika. O sage, what  is the use of many observances leading to higher worlds for  one who fasts on Hari-bodhanī in Kārttika?
DDT: The`higher worlds' are useless since they also bring  the misery of birth and death.
287-289 `One who fasts on Hari-bodhanī is a knower, a yogi, an ascetic.  He has control over his senses. He will attain heaven and liberation. This tithi is dearest to Visnu, a giver of the essence of  religion. A man who fasts on this day once attains liberation.  One who fasts on Prabodhanī will never again enter a womb.  O Nārada, therefore, give up all kinds of religion and do this!
290-292 `O brāhmana, that bathing, giving in charity, austerity or  sacrifice that is done by men in honour of Janārdana on Prabodhanī becomes immortal. O son, this day of Visnuś awakening is a great vrata, a destroyer of heaps of enormous sins. One  should fully fast at that time according to the rules. One who  has satisfied Janārdana, Lord of gods, goes splendidly to the  abode of Hari, illuminating all the directions:
293 Also, in the Padma Purāna:`The unlimited Lord, the rider  of Garuda, fulfils all the desires of those who fast with undivided minds on the day when He wakes up from His sleep on  the bed of serpents in the ocean of milk:
294-299 In the Varāha Purāna :`O fair-eyed one, one who is not generally able to fast should fast fully on one meritorious Dvādaśī,
Prabodhanī. Having worshipped the Lord of all, the Master of  the masters of the universe, one attains the whole fruit of twelve  Dvādaśīs. Dear one, if this tithi is combined with Uttarabhadra  and falls on a Tuesday, its merit is multiplied unlimited times!  Beautiful one, men who fast according to the custom on Śayanī or Bodhanī go to my residence along with millions of gifts.  Sweet one, if this Ekādaśī is combined with Uttarabhadra and  falls on a Monday in the month of Kārttika, it is called"Unlimited".Anything done then becomes unlimited! The fruit of that  Unlimited day is likewise unlimited merit!'
In the same book, in a conversation between Yama and Nā- 300-301  rada:`O sage, now I will tell you something else, the most secret
of secrets. The Ekādaśī in the bright fortnight of Kārttika immediately awards devotion to Lord Hari. It is called Prabodhanī. Best of sages, the diverse, unmanifest divine form of  Visnu is manifest as Dvādaśī in this world of men:
THE SPECIAL GREATNESS OF
PERFORMING THE VRATA IN MATHURA
In the Padma Purāna: As long as Bodhanī, dear to Visnu, is 302-304  not performed in Mathurā, the holy places and sacrifices such
as the Aśvamedha will remain useless. For those who are  burnt by the forest fire of material life, who hanker after the  joy of lust, nearness to the lotus feet of Śrī Krsna is a cooling  home. Such persons on the path of material life should indeed  perform this Prabodhanī. Fool! Why should it then not be celebrated in Mathurā? What is the use of anything else?'
DDT:'Anything else refers to other deeds or holy places.  THE SPECIAL GREATNESS OF  WORSHIPPING THE LORD
ON PRABODHANI
In the Skanda Purāna, the greatness of Prabodhanī:`Dear son, 305-307  men who fast and worship Lord Mādhava with devotion on
this day are freed from any sins that they may have aquired in  their childhood, youth or adulthood, indeed the sin of seven lives,  whether great or small, dry or moist or very secret. Best of sages,  Govinda burns all that when He is worshipped on this tithi:
DDT: Now he describes the greatness of worship and  praise.These three verses deal with worship.`Dry'sins are  those done earlier,'moist' those present.
308-310 Moreover: `O sage, one who speaks about Visnu on the day of  awakening attains the fruit of giving away the seven isles of the  world: In the Varāha Purāna: `Listen to the fruit that one attains by worshipping Me on the Dvādaśī on the bright fortnight of Kārttika! As long as the worlds remain, as long as you  remain, o Mādhavī, he will be devoted only to Me - not to anyone else:
DDT: Here he describes the greatness of praise. `Speakś  refers to all kinds of praise. `Devoted only to Mé means  that he becomes an exclusive devotee.
(311-3I8)  RULES FOR AWAKENING THE LORD  319 śayanyām iva nispādya mahāpūjā¥ jalāśaye
krsna¥ nītvātha sańkalpa¥ krtvā tañ ca prabodhayet
As on Śayana Dvādaśī, Krsna should be led to a reservoir of  water. Great worship should be performed, one should declare  the vrata, and then awaken the Lord.
DDT: The worship should follow what was mentioned  in connection with Śayana Dvādaśī (15.107-110).
THE MANTRAS
320 brahmendra-rudrāgni-kuvera-sūryasomādibhir vandita pāda-padma  budhyasva deveśa jagannivāsa
mantraprabhāvena sukhena deva
`Lord of gods, abode of the worlds,
o Lord whose lotuslike feet are worshipped by gods
such as Brahmā, Indra, Rudra, Agni, Kuvera, Sūrya and Soma,  please happily awake through the power of these mantras!'
iyan tu dvādaśi deva prabodhārtha¥ vinirmitā 321  tvayaiva sarva-lokānā¥ hitārtha¥ śesaśāyinā
`O Lord, this Dvādaśī for waking up has been created by You,  who rest on Sesa, for blessing all the worlds:
uttisthottistha govinda tyaja nidrā¥ jagatpate 322  `Wake up! Wake up, Govinda! Cast off Your sleep,
Lord of the universe.`
tvayi supte jagannātha jagat supta¥ bhaved idam 323  utthite cestate sarvam uttisthottistha mādhava
`When You sleep, Lord of the Universe, the whole world sleeps.  When You awake, everything stirs. Arise, arise, Mādhava!'  In the Varāha Purāna:
hrahmendra-rudrair avitarkya-bhāvo 324  bhavān rsirvanditāńghrih
prāptā taveya¥ dvādaśī kaumudākhyā  jāgrsva jāgrsva ca lokanātha
`Lord, whose nature is beyond the reasoning of Brahmā,  Indra and Rudra, Your feet are worshipped by the seers.  This Dvādaśī of Yours, called Kaumuda, has arrived.  Wake up! Wake up, Lord of the worlds!'
meghā gatā nirmala-pūrna-candrah 325  śāradya-puspāni ca lokanātha
aha¥ dadāmīti ca bhakti-hetor  jāgrsva jāgrsva ca lokanātha
`The clouds are gone. Here is the spotless Full Moon,  and out of devotion, Lord of the worlds,
I offer You these autumnal flowers.  Wake up! Wake up, Lord of the worlds!'
326 Śruti also: the verses beginning with `this Visnu traversed' (Rg  Veda 1.22.17-21).
327 tatas talpāt samutthāpya krsna¥ ghantādi-nisvanaih  tīre sukha¥ niveśyātha prārthayet tad-anugraham
Then Krsna should be lifted up from His bed with the sound  of bells and so on. He should joyfully be invited to the beach  and then one should pray for His favour.
MANTRA FOR PRAYING
In the Bhāgavata Purāna, in the prayers of Śrī Brahmā in the  third canto (3.9.25):
328 so śav adabhra-karuno bhagavān vivrddhaprema-smitena nayanāmburuha¥ vijrmbhan  utthāya viśva-vijayāya ca no visāda¥
mādhvyā girāpanayatāt purusah purānah
`With a greatly loving smile, this most merciful Lord  opens His lotus eyes and stands up,
for conquering the worlds. With sweet words  may this ancient person also remove our fear!'  DDT:`For conquering the worlds' may also mean for creating the worlds, for subjugating the worlds by preaching  about devotion to Himself, or for delighting the worlds.  The word`alsó refers especially to His mercy.`Fear' means  fear of destruction of the universe or the sorrow of not  being able to drink the nectarean beverage of the Lord's  words for a long time. Following the established custom  this verse has here been given, but one can also recite others according to oneś desire.
329 tatah puspāñjali¥ dattvā samsthāpya vidhivat prabhum  nīrājya nyāsa-pūrvañ ca vastrādīni samarpayet
Then one should offer a handful of flowers, establish the Lord  according to the rules, perform nyāsa, wave lamps before Him  and offer Him clothes and so on.
As it is said in the Brahmā Purāna: `On the Ekādaśī of the 330  bright fortnight of the month of Kārttika one should with faith
and devotion place the awakened Keśava on a cart.  DDT: `Ekādaśī' should be understood as before (e.g.  15.544-545). Another reading has `at night which means  that this should take place at the end of the day.'Faitf  means firm conviction,devotioń means love. One should  have both.
`There should be song, dance, the music of vīnas and drums, 33I-335  the auspicious sound of the Rg, Yajur and Sāma-vedas, listen
ing to the Purānas, talks about Vāsudeva, different Vaisnava  hymns, beautiful and wonderful decorations of the ground, incense, splendid lanterns, homas, foodstuffs to offer made of roots,  fruits and leafy vegetables, sweet rice boiled in milk, thickened  syrup, honey, grape juice, pomegranates, flowers from the black  tulasī bush, mālatī and navana flowers, other kinds of flowers,  pleasing red and white sandalwood, ku¥kuma and lac, threads  coloured red with ku¥kuma, and other articles honestly bought:
The Padma Purāna generally follows this description. In the 336  Skanda Purāna: `One should worship Hari on Wednesday in  Kārttika with many flowers, fruits, camphor, aloe and ku¥kuma.'
ittha¥ krtvā mahāpūjā¥ mahā-nīrājana¥ tathā 337  svavratāny arpayet krsne sapuspāksata-vārinā
Thus performing elaborate worship and offering great lamps,  one should dedicate one's vratas to Krsna with flowers, aksata  and water.
DDT:`Thuś means following the statements above from  the Brahmā and other Purānas.`Vratas' means the things  one has given up during the rainy period.
vedastutyādina stutvā svasty astv ity ādina prabhum 338  samprārthya gīta-vādyādi- ghosair ārohayed ratham
After praising Him with Vedic hymns, offering prayers such as  `May there be auspiciousness!', the Lord should be mounted  on a chariot to the sound of song and music.
DDT: One should pray to the Lord with words such as  `May there be auspiciousness! Please calm the minds of all:
339 As is said in the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya Purāna, in a conversation between Śrī Krsna and Yudhisthira: `One should place  the Lord of the god of gods in a chariot. At night the king himself  should move the chariot through the city, on streets lit up with  lamps and resounding with the sound of song and dance:
THE GREATNESS OF  THE CHARIOT FESTIVAL
340-343 In the Uttara-khanda of the Bhavisya Purāna: `Best of kings,  the land that witnesses Dāmodara riding in His cart is completely transformed into heaven!' And also: `O leader of men,  every step with which a man pulls Krsnás chariot equals the  performance of sacrifices. Dog-eaters who behold Keśava on  the chariot even out of mere curiosity become the associates of  gods. Even women who are devoted to the chariot festival are  liberated. They lead the families of their mother and father to  the abode of Hari.
344-345 `Those who dance jubilantly before the cart will enjoy with  heavenly girls during the reign of fourteen Indras, and those  men who sing or play instruments will, after falling down from  heaven, be born as great emperors.
DDT: After falling down from heaven' means that they  will first fulfil all their desires in heaven.
346-349 `O best of kings, the singers who perform in front of the chariot  for a fee will go to the abode of Hari together with the dancers.  For those who simply feel joy during Mukunda's chariot festival  there will be no punishment in hell during the reign of fourteen Indras! Any man who, during the age of Kali, spreads the
glory of the chariot festival through exceptional pious intelligence or even through greed, attains the merit of giving away  the whole world, with its seven isles and seas, jewels and foodgrains, mountains, forests and flowers:
And elsewhere:`When the Lord stands in the chariot dur- 350-355  ing Bodhanī in the bright fortnight of Kārttika, He is most
pleased and fulfils all desires. For men who worship the Lord,  master of the god of gods, on the chariot, all desires are completely satiated. The Highest Person will make those who blissfully decorate the chariot of Śrī Krsna realize their dreams.  The planets such as the sun will always fulfill the desires of  those who decorate the chariot of Śrī Krsna according to their  ability. Those who decorate the chariot of Krsna with flags,  etc, will enjoy with beautiful ladies for six manvantaras! O son,  the merit of those who blissfully decorate the chariot of Krsna  will equal that of bathing at Prayāga with every step.
`Listen! I will now describe the merit of people who shout 356-358  `Jaya! Jaya!" when Krsna stands in the chariot. Any merit that
the poets have elaborately described for the source of the  Gańgā, Prayāga, the place where Gańgā meets the ocean, holy  places such as Vārānasi or seeing all the gods, ís all known to  be present in the word`Jayá' when Visnu is in the chariot!
`When men devotedly worship the Carrier of the world on 359-361  the chariot with flowers and whatever articles He may desire,
He gives them the fulfilment of their desires, and at the end, the  supreme abode. The fruit for those who offer incense, lamps,  auspicious hymns, foodstuffs, worship of the elements or waving of lamps to Krsna seated on the chariot on the day of Hari is  unknown to me, and maybe also to Keśava.
`One who kills a cow, a foetus or a brāhmana, steals from or 362-365  reviles a brāhmana, defiles the bed of his guru, drinks wine or
performs any other kind of great sin, bewildered by the age of  Kali, is freed from all offenses by one step in front of the cart:  Elsewhere: `Those who call out` Jaya" in front of the great Visnu on the chariot and worship Him are freed from all sins and  go to the abode of Hari: Furthermore: `In front the leader of
the demons pulls the chariot! So also gods, siddhas, yaksas,  gandharvas and men:
DDT: He cites this verse to show that the cart does not  move by the strength of humans alone, but by the greatness of the devotees of the Lord.'The leader of the demonś is Śrī Prahlāda.
366 itthañ ca ratha yātrāyā vidhir vyaktah svato 'bhavat  tathāpi kaścit tatrānyo viśeso 'pi vitanyate
Now the rules for the chariot festival have become self-evident.  Still, some people come up with particular details.  DDT:'Now' means after listening to the greatness of the  chariot festival. The idea is that there is no need of more  elaboration. The details' are praying for benedictions, etc.  RULES FOR THE CHARIOT FESTIVAL
367 śrī krsne tu rathārūdhe krtvā jaya jaya-dhvanim  nispādya ca mahā pūjām aśir-vākyāni kīrtayet
When Śrī Krsna is in the chariot, one should shout Jaya! Jaya!',  perform elaborate worship and sing prayers asking for benedictions.
IN THE VISNU-DHARMA:  368 vaktra¥ nīlotpali-ruci-lasat-kundalābhyā¥ pramrsta¥  candrākāra¥ racita-tilaka¥ candanenāksataiś ca
gatvā līlāñ jana-sukha-karī¥ preksanenāmrtaugha¥  padmāvāsa¥ satatam urasā dhārayan pātu visnuh  'With a face like the full moon the colour of a blue lotus,
splendid with dangling earrings and a tilaka of sandelwood pulp  and aksata, entered the play to delight the people
with the nectar ocean of His glance,  always carrying the lotus-dweller on his chest:  may that Visnu protect!'
DDT: The `lotusdweller' is Laksmī. In connection with  the next verse the meaning is actually'May that Visnu  protect you!'
yuktah śaivyādi-vāhair madhuratara-ranat-kiñkinī jāla-mālai 369  ratnaughair mauktikānām avirata-manibhih sa¥bhrtaiś caiva hāraih
haimaih kumbhaih patākā-śivatara-rucibhir bhūsitah ketu-mukhyaiś  chaitrair brahmeśa-vandyo duritaharahareh pātu jaitro ratho vah  `Yoked to Śaivya and the others
with very sweetly chiming small circlets of bells,  enchantingly covered with many jewels
and unparalleled pearl gems,  decorated with golden pitchers, splendid flags,  lotuses, great lamps and parasols,
praised by Brahmā and Śiva:
may the victorious cart of Hari, stealer of sin, protect you!'  DDT:'Saivya' is one of the four horses of Visnu, the oth
ers being Sugrīva, Meghapuspa and Valāhaka. Since the  Lord rides on the present cart, it is compared to the eternal cart. The second line can refer to either the horses or  to the cart.
modantā¥ sujanā hy anindita-dhiyah srastākhilopadravāh 370  svasthāh susthira-buddhayah pratihatāmitrā ramantā¥ sukham
re daityā giri gahvarāni gahunāny āśu vrajadhvā¥ bhayād  daityābhir bhagavān aya¥ yadupatir yāna¥ samārohati  `Good men! Rejoice, for your minds are virtuous,  your misfortune is gone.
You are content, your thoughts are calm,  your enemies are repelled. Happily enjoy!
O demons! Quickly flee into deep mountain caves! The Lord,  killer of demons, ruler of the Yadus, rides on the chariot!'  palāyadhvā¥ pālayadhva¥ re re ditija-dānavāh 3y
sa¥raksanāya lokānā¥ rathārudho nrkeśarī
'Flee! Flee, o demons born of Diti!
To protect the worlds the Man-lion has mounted the chariot!'  372 tato vicitra gadyāni pathitvātha mahāprabhoh  mahāprasadā-mālāñ ca svīkuryāt parayā mudā
After then chanting wonderful prose prayers to the great Lord,  one should with great happiness accept an offered garland.  THE GREATNESS OF
ACCEPTING AN OFFERED GARLAND  373-374 It is said: `One who with devotion carries a garland offered to  Visnu, a reservoir of auspiciousness, will never meet misfortune in this world or in the next. Therefore, in order to fulfil all  your desires, with all effort take this garland, giver of happiness  and liberation!'
375 sañcintyākrsyamānañ ca śrīprahlādādibhih ratham  ākarsayed rājapuryā¥ bhrāmayed vaisnavaih samam  Thinking that the cart is pulled by Srī Prahlāda and the others,
one should move it through the capital with Vaisnavas.  376-379 As is said in the Bhavisya Purāna, Uttara-khanda: `To the  sound of song and music, dancing devotees of the Lord move  the chariot through the middle of the city.' And also: `Son of  Pāndu, when the chariot of Mukunda arrives on the day of  awakening in Kārttika, all temples and houses in the city  should be cleaned and every place made pleasing, decorated  with Hags. O king, many auspicious gates with beautiful banana-tree trunks should be erected all over. Deeply devoted  men should decorate the chariot in various ways:
DDT: It is said that the cleaning should be made at this  time, but it should be understood that it should also be  done at the occasion of the other great festivals mentioned earlier.
rathena gacchan bhagavān anugamyo 'khilair janaih 380  sva-sva gehāgrataś cārcyo 'nyathā doso mahān bhavet
Travelling in His cart, the Lord should be followed by all men.  In front of each and everyone's house He should be worshipped.  Otherwise a great sin will appear.
DDT: All men' includes also persons satisfied in the self.  THE MANDATORINESS
OF FOLLOWING THE CART AND SO ON
In the Bhavisya Purāna, Uttara-khanda:'Dog-eaters and oth- 38I-382  ers who walk in front, behind or beside the cart will all become
equal to Visnu. Learned brāhmanas who do not follow Janārdana when He moves on the chariot, however, will become vile  dog-eaters:
DDT: Before stating that following the cart is mandatory  since non-observance will lead to sin, he describes the  great good it brings. Another reading has'see' instead of  'follow', which indicates that it is also mandatory to watch  the chariot festival. The mandatoriness of following the  cart is also shown by verse 386 below.
Furthermore:'When Madhusūdana on the chariot appears in 383-385  front of someonés house, that person should perform worship
without duplicity. If the Carrier of the earth is not worshipped  in front of oneś house, the forefathers will suffer for fifteen  years. He again who worships Mādhava in front of his house  will dwell in Śvetadvīpa during the time of fourteen Indras!'
DDT: With these verses he wishes to show that one  should not worship only to avoid the sin that non-observance would lead to, but also because the worship leads to  a great reward.
Elsewhere also:`Those who through bewilderment do not fol- 386  low the Highest Lord when He moves will become brahmarāksasa ghosts even if all their karma has been burnt up through  knowledge:
DDT: Even persons who are liberated in this body will  attain this terrible destination by the strenght of such a  great offence towards the Lord.
387 atha svamandira¥ nītvā pūrvavat pūjayet prabhum  rātrau jāgarana¥ kuryād vidhivad vaisnavaih samam
Then the Lord should, as previously, be led back into His temple and worshipped. At night one should following the rules  keep vigil together with Vaisnavas.
DDT: As previously' means as was described in connection with for example Sayana Dvādaśī. If the Dvādaśī is  Unmīlanī or another Mahā-dvādaśī, one should fast on  Dvādaśī, celebrate the chariot festival and keep the vigil  at that night. Otherwise one should keep vigil on the previous day of fasting, and celebrate the cart festival on the  day of breaking the fast after awakening the Lord.
GREATNESS OF KEEPING VIGIL
ON THE NIGHT OF PRABODHANI  388-390 In the Skanda Purāna: All the sin that one has accumulated  during a thousand previous lives burns like a heap of cotton  during the vigil on Prabodhanī. O sage, even a man who has performed a terrible sin like killing a brāhmana becomes pure if he  performs the vigil of Visnu. Whatever sin one commits by his  deeds, words or thoughts, Govinda cleanses away on the vigil  of Prabodhanī.
39I-394 'Whatever fruit is difficult to attain for brāhmanas by rites  such as the horse sacrifice, that one easily attains on the vigil  on Prabodhanī. The fruit of bathing at all holy places or giving  away great amounts of gold is not equal to that of performing  the vigil of Hari. The merit one is said to attain by worshipping Candra and Sūrya times a thousand is that of keeping vigil  on Prabodhani. Bathing, giving alms, austerities, sacrifices,  study of the Ueda and worshipping Visnu: all that times ten  million equals keeping the vigil on Prabodhanī!
`Prabodhanī including the vigil leads one quickly to the world 395-397  of Visnu, together with past, present and future relatives. The  forefathers of someone who performs Krsna's vigil are liber
ated from their hellish sufferings and, ornamented and ecstatically happy, depart for the world of Visnu. Keeping vigil on  Prabodhanī without a doubt liberates those born in the family  of one's wife, mother and father.'
And also: After pouring water into a conch, one should on 398-399  the vigil of Prabodhanī offer arghya to Janārdana with fruits
and different substances. The fruit of offering arghya on the  day of awakening equals the fruit of all donations and holy  places multiplied by ten million:
Similarly, in the Padma Purāna:`Since the vigil on Prabodha- 400-40  nī is dear to Visnu anywhere, how much more so in His birth
place in Mathurā! Nothing men do in this world can equal performing one Ekādaśī at the birthplace of Krsna. People who  there happily keep vigil at night will always, .at the end of the  night of the illusion of material existence, wake up, wake up:
DDT: The meaning of the last sentence is that they will  never dwell in the illusion of material existence.`Wake up'  is repeated for emphasis.
In the same book, at the end of the story of Srī Rādhikā:`By the 403  strength of the merit of keeping vigil on Prabodhanī, the Lord
was satisfied and fulfilled the promise of Brahmā. In Vrndāvana  He celebrated the rāsa dance with Rādhā and also others:  DDT: `The promise of Brahmā': in heaven an apsarā by
the name Candrakāntī prayed to Brahmā.`May I become  the most dear to Krsna amongst all the cowherdesses!'  Brahmā replied `Your wish is granted'. This promise  Krsna fulfilled. This is described in detail in the part of  the Padma Purāna dealing with the greatness of Kārttika.  Even though Goddess Śrī Rādhā is always most dear to  Krsna, this was done to show that the promise of Brahmā  never goes in vain, to remove the doubt people may have  in the words of great persons.
404 `Dancing with Krsna in the wonderful form of a cowherd, as she  desired in her last life, her senses agitated by ecstatic love, Rādhā leads with this story even the best people to contentment.
DDT:`The best people means everyone, even the best of  men.`Contentment' is becoming most dear to Krsna. She  is overflowing with love, therefore, just by listening to this  story great love of Krsna can immediately be awakened.
405-407 'Therefore, fast on Prabodhanī and keep vigil at night. What  brāhmanas will again take birth after seeing the awakened Hari?  What can be said about keeping vigil in the house of Hari in  Mathurā on Bodhanī in Kārttika? There is nothing better than  this. A vaiśya liberated a brahma-rāksasa by even half a moment of a vigil on Prabodhanī in Mathurā.
DDT:A vaiśya': this story is told in the Varāha Purāna, the  greatness of Mathurā (153.6-68).A merchant by the name  Sudhana was on the way to Akrūra-tīrtha to keep vigil  when he was captured by a brahma-rāksasa on the path. To  get away, he gave the rāksasa a promise and was released.  After he had completed the vigil he returned and the rāksasa saw him again. With a cry the rāksasa prayed to him.  By giving the rāksasa only a bit of the merit of his dancing  during the vigil, he liberated him:
408-410 `I am not able to describe the greatness of pleasing Hari with  praise, music and song during the vigil at night! One who sings  in front of Krsna during Prabodhanī Dvādaśī for even a moment gives up all worlds and attains the abode of Visnu: And  it is also said: `Give up safe, prosperous countries and perform  the vigil on Prabodhanī during Kārttika in Mathurā!'
BREAKING THE FAST, AND SO ON  411-414 In the Padma Purāna, the greatness of Kārttika: `Having presented this unparallelled, very difficult vrata in front of Krsna,  one should break the fast on Dvādaśī during the bright fortnight of Kārttika. Having worshipped Janārdana with devotion,
one will attain the world of Visnu: In the Mahābhārata:`Men  should accept a fourfold strict vrata of the four months of the  rainy period. On Dvādaśī during the bright fortnight of Kārttika it is completed. After performing the morning duties one  should feed the brāhmanas, gods on earth, according to oneś  means. So that the vrata will not be broken, one should also  give them donations and alms according to the nature of the  vrata. Then one should break the fast with the things one has  given up during the rainy period:
In the Bhavisya Purāna, Uttara-khanda: After bathing in 4I5-4I7  pure water in the morning, one should eat different kinds of
food: ghee, milk, yoghurt, honey and kāsāra- and other sweets.  Then one should honour the best brāhmanas with sandalwood, perfumed powder, flowers and perfume. After that one  should with sweet words and a contented mind give the brāhmanas whatever one has given up during the rainy period, together with desired leaves, flowers, fruits and so on. One should  tell the brāhmanas what rules one has followed during the  four months and then devotedly give them donations:
Another detail is given in the Padma Purāna: `O brāhma- 418  nas, after the vrata of the four months one should ask for unbrokenness:
DDT: After feeding the brāhmanas and giving them donations, one should ask the brāhmanas for unbrokenness,  saying`acchidram astú, may it all be unbroken.


APPENDIX I
HOW TO DETERMINE EKĀDAŚĪ  BASIC TERMS AND GENERAL RULES  When thinking of days and months, we generally think of a solar calendar, based upon the movement of the sun within the  zodiac. The time taken by the sun to traverse the whole zodiac  is a little more than 365 days, and this is usually divided into  twelve solar months and 5a weeks. The dates of all festivals  mentioned in the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa are, however, calculated  according to a lunar calendar. This makes the determination  of festival dates a little complicated.
While the solar calendar is based on the movement of the  sun, the lunar calendar is based on the movement of the moon  in relation to the sun. The lunar calendar consists of months,  the time between a full moon (when the whole moon as seen  from the earth is illuminated) and the next. This takes about  29.5 days. Twelve such months make up a lunar year. The lunar  year will thus have about 354 days, eleven less than the solar  year. This discrepancy means that the position of a date of the  lunar calender ín the solar calendar will change from year to  year. In order to synchronize the two calendars, an extra month  (adhika-māsa) is added to the lunar calendar approximately  every third year. In India both calendars have been used since  ancient times.
In India a day is the time between one sunrise and the next.  This means that a day of fasting will generally begin at sunrise  and continue to the next sunrise, not from midnight to midnight as we would think in the west. This is quite simple. More  difficult to understand is the lunar day, tithi. A tithi has nothing to do with the rising and setting of the sun, but instead  with the different phases of the moon. The first tithi of a lunar  month starts when the moon is full, or when the angle be
tween the sun and moon is 18o degrees. It continues until the  angle between sun and moon has increased with 12 degrees.  Then the second tithi starts, and it continues until 12 more degrees have passed. When 15 such tithis have passed, the angle  between sun and moon is o degrees, which means that the moon  can not be seen at all. That is called new moon. Then the angle  will gradually decrease during the next 15 tithis, until the  moon again becomes full and a lunar month is completed.  The angular speed of the moon in relation to the sun is not always the same, so the length of one tithi can vary between 19  and 26 hours. Because of this, a tithi can start at any time of  the day.
If fasting is enjoined on, for example, the eighth tithi, one  must first determine the exact time when the tithi begins. For  this one must observe the moon, or more practically use a table  of someone else's observations and calculations. If the tithi continues over more than one day, the day whose sunrise falls  within the tithi should be chosen (see figure 1). If more than  one sunrise occurs within the tithi, preference is given to the  first. If no sunrise is touched, the day in which the tithi falls is  chosen (see figure 2). The fasting should be observed on the  day thus determined.
The 15 tithis when the moon is waning is called the krsnapaksa or dark fortnight, and the 15 tithis when the moon is  waxing is called the śukla-paksa or light fortnight. In both fortnights, except for the Full Moon and New Moon, the tithis are  named after their number. The ninth tithi is thus called Navamī, the tenth Daśamī, the eleventh Ekādaśī, the twelfth Dvādaśī and the thirteenth Trayodaśī. These tithis are the ones  mentioned in this book.
Two more terms must be understood before proceeding.  The background belt of stars in the sky within which the planets move is called the zodiac. In both in India and the west the  zodiac is divided into twelve astrological signs. The names of  the signs are almost the same in India as in the west. The Indian zodiac is further divided into 27 lunar mansions or aster
isms, each covering 13 degrees and 20 minutes of the zodiac.  When the moon is situated in one of these asterisms, the  present tithi is said to be ćombined' with that asterism.




WHEN TO CELEBRATE EKADAŚI
As already noted, Ekādaśī means eleventh: There will be two  eleventh tithis in a month, one during the dark fortnight and  one during the bright. One should always fast on both. Some  people differentiate between them and say that householders  should fast only during the bright fortnight, but the author  thinks such statements are meant for materialists and not for  Vaisnavas. Some authorities also think that one should not fast  in the case of sa¥krānti, when the sun enters a new sign of the  zodiac, or if there is a birth or death in the family. The author  refutes all these opinions. One should always fast on Ekādaśī.
However, there are tithis of two kinds: pure and mixed.'Pure'  means that it begins before sunrise of the day when one is to  celebrate it. For example, if Navamī tithi begins two hours before sunrise on August 8th, then August 8th is pure (śuddha)  Navamī. Had it begun even one minute after sunrise, it would  have been mixed with the previous tithi. If it continues beyond  the next sunrise, it is also mixed, but not impure. Additionally,  for Ekādaśī not to be mixed with the previous tithi, Daśamī, it  must begin at least two muhūrtas (1 hour 36 minutes) before  sunrise. If Ekādaśī is mixed with the previous tithi by beginning even a second too late, one should not fast on that day.  Instead one should fast on the next day, Dvādaśī. (see figure 2)  To fast on such an impure Ekādaśī is an offence to the Lord  and very detrimental.
Some authorities say that in order to be pure, Ekādaśī must  actually begin before midnight on the previous day, but that  view is rejected by the author. However, if Ekādaśī begins after  midnight, the first twelve hours of Ekādaśī cannot be used for  bathing, declaring the vrata or worship. For example, if Ekādaśī  begins at or.35, one can not take his morning bath until 13.35.  In this case the mandatory daily worship will naturally continue into the late evening.
To complete Ekādaśī, one should break the fast on the next  day after sunrise, after one has performed the mandatory ritu
als such as bathing and worshipping the Lord. The best time is  at midday. However, one must not let Dvādaśī pass before  breaking the fast. Different options for such a situation is given  in the text (13.238-256). One should also not break the fast during the first quarter of Dvādaśī, which is called Hari-vāsara.
MAHA-DVADAŚI  Now, even if Ekādaśī is pure, it should be rejected if the next  day is Mahā-dvādaśī. There are eight types of such special Dvādaśīs, four that have to do with the length of the tithi, and four  that have to do with lunar asterisms. These Mahā-dvādaśīs  can occur at any time of the year. If Ekādaśī is followed by  Mahā-dvādaśī, one should always fast on Mahā-dvādaśī instead of Ekādaśī.
The first type of Mahā-dvādaśī is Unmīlanī. When Ekādaśī  begins in the proper way (at least two muhūrtas before sunrise) but then continues on beyond the next sunrise, the following day is called Unmīlanī Maha-dvādaśī. Since a tithi may  be up to 26 hours long, this will happen now and then. One  should fast on that day. (The same would of course apply if the  Ekādaśī had begun less than two muhūrtas before the first  sunrise, but in that case the next day would be a normal pure  Ekādaśī, as per the rules above.)
Vañjulī Mahā-dvādaśī is when Ekādaśī is pure, but the  next Dvādaśī begins before sunrise and extends beyond the  next sunrise. In this case one should fast on Dvādaśī. The  Dvādaśī does not have to begin two muhūrtas before sunrise.
Trisprśa Mahā-dvādaśī again is when Ekādaśī begins at  least two muhūrtas before sunrise, but Dvādaśī is so short that  before the next sunrise the next tithi, Trayodaśī, has already  begun. One should fast on that day and break the fast on the  next day, which will be Trayodaśī.
When the new moon or full moon tithi begins before sunrise and continues beyond the next sunrise, the preceding Dvādaśī is called Paksavardhinī Mahā-dvādaśī.

When the Punarvasu, Sravana, Rohinī or Pusya-asterisms  are combined with Dvādaśī in the bright fortnight after sunrise, we have Jayā, Vijayā, Jayantī or Pāpanāśinī Mahā-dvādaśī, respectively. If the moon enters these asterisms on Dvādaśī after sunrise, one should fast on that day, whether the  asterism lasts longer than, as long as, or a shorter time than  the tithi. If the sun enters the asterism before sunrise on Dvādaśī, one should fast on that day, if the asterism lasts longer  than or as long as the tithi. Furthermore, for the day to be a  Mahā-dvādaśī, the Dvādaśī tithi must last until sunset, except if the asterism is Sravana.
So that one does not transgress the Dvādaśī, one should  break the fast after the end of the asterism, if the tithi is longer  than the asterism, except if the constellation is Rohinī or  Sravana. In that case, the fast should be broken in the middle  of the asterism. If the tithi is shorter, the fast should be broken  in the middle of the tithi.
SPECIAL EKADAŚIS AND DVADAŚIS
There are also special festivals at different times of the year  which have particular rules for worship. Different Purānas  contain descriptions of a great amount of these, and the author  has selected those which are mandatory for Vaisnavas. They  all occur on Ekādaśī or Dvādaśī during the bright fortnight,  śukla-paksa. Most festivals are to be celebrated on Dvādaśī,  but if the Dvādaśī is not a Mahā-dvādaśī, the fasting should be  done in the usual way on Ekādaśī.
Bhaimī Ekādaśī comes in the month of Māgha. Contrary  to the others, following special rules on this festival is not mandatory for Vaisnavas. Amardakī Ekādaśī is in Phālguna. If the  following Dvādaśī is combined with the asterism Pusya, it is  called Govinda Dvādaśī, and the festival and fasting is celebrated on that day. Damanāropana Dvādaśī is in Caitra, but  if there is any obstacle to performing the festival at that time,  in Vaiśākhā or Sravana. Nirjala Ekādaśī ís when the sun is
situated in Taurus or in Gemini in the month of Jyaistha. Pavitrāropana Dvādaśī is in Srāvana. In an emergency it can be  done on any bright fortnight when the sun is in the Cancer,  Leo or Virgo, but never when the sun is in Libra.
If Ekādaśī or Dvādaśī in the bright fortnight of Bhadra is  connected with the asterism Śravana, it is called Śravana Ekādaśī or Dvādaśī and has some special rituals connected with it  since it is the appearance day of Lord Vāmana. One should fast  on the day combined with Sravana. If the tithi is so short that  (pure) Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī, both connected with Śravana,  occur on the same day, it is called Visnu-śrńkhala, the chain of  Visnu. Fasting on this day is very meritorious. If both Ekādaśī  and Dvādaśī are connected with Śravana but on different days,  one may exceptionally fast on both if one is able, or else only  on Dvādaśī. If neither is combined with Śravana, one should  fast on Ekādaśī and worship Vāmana on Dvādaśī.
The most important festivals are Śayana, Pārśva-parivartana and Prabodhanī Dvādaśī, when Visnu goes to sleep  before the rainy period, turns over in His sleep and wakes up.  The first is celebrated on the bright Dvādaśī in Asādha, the second likewise in Bhadra, and the third in Kārttika. If the asterism  Revatī is present at night on Prabodhanī Dvādaśī, Visnu should  be awakened in the afternoon. If Revatī is present in the beginning of the day or not at all, Visnu should be awakened at dusk.
APPENDIX II
JĪVA GOSVĀMĪ ON EKĀDAŚĪ
In the Bhakti-sandarbha, in the context of describing the process of arcana or ceremonial worship of the Lord, Jīva Gosvāmī  also discusses Ekādaśī. Passage 299 begins with a description  of Janmāstamī, and then continues like this:
Ekādaśī is certainly mandatory even for non-Vaisnavas. The  general rule is given in the Visnu-dharma: A Vaisnava or Saura  should perform the Ekādaśī vrata', and in the Saura Purāna:  `This a Vaisnava, Saura or Saiva should fully celebrate.` The  Nārada-pañcāratra, while describing the necessary duties after initiation, gives the following specifics in the passage beginning with `I will tell you the rules': `One should not eat on  Ekādaśī of both fortnights. At night one should keep vigil and  especially worship the Almighty.'
About this subject the Visnu-yāmala says:`To differentiate  between the dark and light fortnight, to engage in sinful activities, to eat fruits or other things even though healthy and to  perform the Śrāddha-ceremony: these things are forbidden on  the day of Ekādaśī, and on Dvādaśī sleeping in the day-time  and picking tulasī leaves: Bathing Visnu during the day is at  that time also prohibited. While describing Vaisnava-dharma  the Padma Purāna, Uttara-khanda, states: `Dvādaśī should be  performed with firm faith:
In the Skanda Purāna, Kāśī-khanda, and in the Garuda Purāna, the greatness of Dvārakā, Candraśarman says this about  Bhagavad-dharma:`O Krsna, listen to what I will do from this  day on. I will not eat on Ekādaśī. I will always perform the  vigil. Daily will I worship You here with great devotion. When  your day is not touched by even half a moment of Daśamī it  can bestow liberation. I will also perform the eight Dvādaśīs  that please You: And so forth.
It is said in the Agni Purāna: `On Ekādaśī one should not  eat. This is a great Vaisnava vrata.' In the Gautamīya-tantra: `If  a Vaisnava by madness eats on Ekādaśī, then his worship of  Visnu is worthless. He attains a terrible hell.` In the Matsyaand Bhavisya Purānas: `One who fasts on Ekādaśī should eat  on Dvādaśī. Whether during the light or dark forthnight, this  is a great Vaisnava vrata: In the Skanda Purāna: `One who eats  on Ekādaśī is a killer of his mother, father, brother and guru.  He will fall from Vaikuntha.'
That Vaisnavas should not eat indeed means that they  should avoid even Mahā-prasāda, since generally eating anything else is forbidden for them. As it is said in the Nāradapañcāratra: `O Nārada, one should always accept prasāda,  but not on Ekādaśī. This pertains to devotees of Rāma and  so forth, what to speak of others: In the Brahmānda Purāna:  `One should not enjoy a leaf, a flower, a fruit, water, food,  drink and medicine that has not been offered. This is the prescription for eating. Those men who eat unoffered food make  themselves eligible for atonement. Therefore, always offer  everything to Visnu and then enjoy.'
The vigil is mandatory, as stated in the Skanda Purāna, in a  discussion between Umā and Maheśvara: `The fortune of one  who does not keep vigil on the night of Visnu is destroyed just  like by insulting Vaisnavas. He will not have any interest in the  vigil of Dvādaśī, and he will not have eligibility for worshipping Keśava:
That this vrata is pleasing to Visnu we hear in the Padma  Purāna, Uttara-khanda:`Listen, goddess, as I will explain the  regulations for Dvādaśī. By even a moment's remembrance  of it, Janārdana becomes most pleased: In the Bhavisya Purāna: `Ekādaśī is greatly meritorious, a dispeller of all sins, a  lamp illuminating devotion to Visnu and a bestower of the  highest goal:
Therefore, since this vrata is demonstrated in the Bhāgavata  even by persons firmly situated in devotion, such as Srīmad  Ambarīsa, who only eat Mahā-prasāda, it is understood to be
an intrinsic part of Vaisnava-dharma. This is the conclusion.  Also, in the Padma Purāna, the greatness of Kārttika, we hear  that through the power of the Ekādaśī vrata in the month of  Kārttika, a brāhmana girl attained the position of someone  very dear to the Lord, Satyābhāmā. What more can one say?
APPENDIX III
VEDIC MANTRAS  CITED IN THE TEXT
In the text of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa translated above, two Vedic  mantras have been referred to, the first for establishing the  Lord (e.g. 13.515), and the second for awakening the Lord (16.  327). So that persons without the qualification for chanting  such mantras would not accidentally recite them, the author  has not given them in full. I have included them here for the  sake of completeness.
It must however be stressed that according to orthodox  Vaisnavas, women and śūdras are not allowed to chant mantras  from the Śruti portion of the Vedic literature. Baladeva Vidyābhūsana holds the same view in his Govinda-bhāsya commentary to Vedānta-sūtra 1.3.34-38. This applies also to those twiceborn men who simply do not know how to chant such mantras.  As can be seen from the story of Vrtrāsura in the Bhāgavatam  (6.9-I2), a small mistake in chanting such mantras can lead to  unwanted results.
I. MANTRA FOR INSTALLATION  Vajāsaneyī Sa¥hitā 2.13
(yajñavalkya rsih, tristup chandah  devakī-sahita-śrīkrsno devatā, deva-samsthāpane viniyogah)  máno jūtír jusatām ájiyasya brhaspátir yajñám imá¥ tanotú
árista¥ yajñá¥ sám imá¥ dadhātu viśve devása íhá mādayantām  óm prátistha
May the butterś rapid flow delight the mind. May Brhaspati  perform the sacrifice. May he make the sacrifice faultless. May  all the gods rejoice here! O¥! Be established!
2. MANTRAS FOR AWAKENING  THE LORD ON BODHANI DVADAŚI
Rg Veda 1.2a.t7-aI
(kanvo medhatithir rsih, gāyatrī chandah  śrīvisnur devatā, deva-prabodhane viniyogah)  idá¥ visnur ví cakrame tredhá ní dadhe padám  sámūlham asya pāmsuré
This Visnu traversed, thrice He set down his foot. All was gathered in its dust.
trim padá ví cakrame vísnur gopá ádābhyah  áto dhármāni dhāráyan
Three steps took Visnu, the cowherd, the undeceived, thus establishing the dharmas.
vísnoh kármāni paśyeta yáto vratáni paspaśé  índrasya yújiah sákhā
Behold the deeds of Visnu! By this the friend and ally of Indra  watches over the vratas.
tád vísnoh paramá¥ padá¥ sádā paśyanti sūráyah  diviva cáksur átatam
The gods always behold the highest abode of Visnu, like brightness spread across the sky.
tád víprāso vipanyávo jāgrvārirsah sámindhate  visnor yát paramám padám
Rejoicing, the seers attentively illuminate that highest abode  of Visnu.
APPENDIX IV
KAUŚIKĪ SONGS
In Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 13.227 it is said that at the dawn of Dvādaśī,  one should sing songs describing the amorous adventures of  Krsna during the night. A song from the Gīta-govinda is given  as an example, but the Gaudīya Vaisnava tradition has many  other such songs that the practitioner can choose from. I have  added one here for those who wish to delight the Lord in this way.  I. GITA-GOVINDA 8.2-] SONG 17)
(Bhairavī-rāga, Yati-tāla)
rajani janita-guru jāgara-rāga-kasāyitam alasa-nivedam  vahati nayanam anuragām iva sphutam udita-rasābhi-niveśam  hari hari yāhi mādhava yāhi keśava mā vada kaitabha-vādam
tām anusara sarasīruha-locana yā tava harati visādam  Bloodshot from a sleepless night of passion, but now tired,  your eyes convey the mood of awakened love. Alas, Mādhava!  Leave! Go away, Keśava! Don't speak your lies. Follow her, lotus-eyed one, for she takes away your sorrow.
kajjala-malina-vilocana-cumbana-viracita-nīlima-rūpam  daśana-vasanam aruna¥ tava krsna tanoti taror anurūpam  hari hari...
Dark from kissing her collyrium-blackened eyes, your red lips  are like your body, Krsna. Alas...
vapur anuharati tava smara-sańgara-khara-nakhara-ksata-rekham  marakata-sakala-kalita-kaladhauta-liper iva rati jaya-lekham  hari hari...
Marked with scrathes of sharp nails in the battle of love, your  body proclaims the victory of passion in gold writing on sapphire. Alas...
carana-kamala galad-alaktaka-siktam ida¥ tava hrdayam udāram  darśayatīva bahir madana-druma-nava-kiśalaya-parivāram  hari hari...
Your splendid chest is moistened by red lac from her lotus feet.  They make blossoms from the tree of love appear on your skin.  Alas...
daśana-pada¥ bhavad-adhara-gata¥ mama janayati cetasi khedam  kathayati katham adhunāpi mayā saha tava vapur etad abhedam  hari hari...
The toothmark on your lip cleaves my heart. Why does it even  now speak of the union of your body with mine? Alas...
bahir iva malinatara¥ tava krsna mano 'pi bhavisyati nūnam  katham atha vañchayase janam anugatam asama-śara-jvara-dūnam  hari hari...
Krsna, your mind must now be even darker than your skin.  How can you deceive someone tortured by the terrible fever of  love? Alas...
bhramati bhavān abalā-kavalūya vanesu kim atra vicitram  prathayati pūtanikaiva vadhū-vadha-nirdaya-bāla-caritram  hari hari...
What is so special about you roaming in the woods to devour  the weak? Pūtanā's fate shows your childhood famed by mercilessly killing women. Alas...
śrījayadeva-bhanita-rati-vañchita-khandita yuvati-vilāpam  śrnuta sudhā-madhura¥ vibudhā vibudhālayato pi durāpam  hari hari...
Srī Jayadeva has sung this lament of a maiden deceived by passion. Listen, wise one! Such sweet nectar rarely comes from heaven. Alas...
2. 'O MY FRIEND, LOOK!'  BY JÑANA DASA,
A DISCIPLE OF JAHNAVA DEVI
dekho re śakhi, śyāma-canda  indu-badani rādhikā  bibidha yantra, yubati-brnda
gaoye rāga mālikā
O my friend, look: The Dark Moon and Moon-faced Rādhikā!  All the young girls play different instruments and sing a garland of rāgas.
manda pabana, kuñja bhabana,  kuśuma gandha mādhurī  madana rāja naba samāja  bhramata bhramara cāturī
The soft breeze, the abode in the grove, the sweet smell of flowers and the restlessly roaming bees create a new kingdom for the  God of love.
tarala tāla, gati dulāla  nāce natini natana sūra  prānanātha, dharata hāta
rāi tāhe adhika pūra
With the swift beat the Danceress and Dancer move in wonderful ways. Rāi (Rādha) takes hold of the hand of the Lord of  her life and is filled with great love.
ańge añge, parāśe bhora  keho rahato kāhuka kora  jñāna dāsa, kohoto rāsa  yaiche jalade bijuri joda
Again and again their bodies touch, and the ecstasy increases!  Like this Jñāna dāsa describes their rāsa-dance: the tender embrace of a cloud and a bolt of lightning.
APPENDIX V


The Sarvatobhadra mandala should be drawn on the floor using either rice flour and powder from different kinds of ground  beans, or then with paint. One should begin by drawing the  grid and then work from the inside out. Care should be taken  to insure that one side is to the exact North. The dimensions  of the mandala are flexible, as long as the internal proportions  are not changed. After this the main gods should be invoked  into the mandala, since it represents the universe. The following ís a simplified procedure in accordance with the Dig-darśinītīkā to verse 19.905 of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa.
This formula should be used for invoking each god or group  of gods: o¥ bhūr bhuvah svah/ (Name of the god in the vocative  case) ihāgaccha!/ (Name of the god in the dative case) namah/  (Name of the god in the accusative case) avāhāyami (showing the  mudra for invocation), sthāpayāmi (showing the mudra for establishing).
For example: o¥ bhūr bhuvah svah/brahman ihāgaccha!/brahmane namah/brahmānam avahāyāmi, sthāpayāmi.`O¥ bhūr bhuvah svah. Come here, Brahmā! Obeisance to Brahmā. Brahmā I  invoke, establish:
The god or group of gods should then be worshipped with  sandalwood pulp, flowers and aksata. The following is the order  in which the gods should be invoked and established, their place  in the mandala and the vocative, dative and accusative cases of  their names:
CENTRE  Brahmā (CENTRE), brahman, brahmane, brahmānam  NEAR THE OUTER BOUNDARY
OF THE MANDALA  Soma (N), soma, somāya, somam
Iśana (NE), īśana, īśanāya, īśanam  Indra (E), indra, indrāya, indram  Agni (SE), agne, agnaye, agnim
Yama (S), yama, y-amāya, yamam  Nirrti (Sw), nirrte, nirrtaye, nirrtim  Varuna (w), varuna, varunāya, varunam  Vāyu (Nw), vāyo, vāyave, vāyum
8 Vasus (NNw), asta-vasavā, asta-vasubhyo, asta-vasūn  II Rudras (NNE), ekādaśa-rudrā, ekādaśa-rudrebhyo,  ekādaśa-rudrān
I2 Adityas (ENE), dvādaśādityā, dvādaśādityebhyo,  dvādaśādityān
2 Aśvins (ESE), aśvinau, aśvibhyam, aśvinau  Pitrs (SSE), pitāro, pitrbhyo, pitrn
Nāgas (SSw), sarpā, sarpebhyo,.sarpān  Skanda (wSw), skanda, skandāya, skandam  Nandīśvara (wNw), nandīśvara, nandīśvaraya,  nandīśvaram
ON THE PETALS OF  THE LOTUS IN THE MIDDLE
The seven Prajāpatis (NE), daksādi-saptakā, daksādisaptakebhyo,daksādi-saptakān  Visnu (E), visno, visnave, visnum
Durgā (SE), durge, durgāyai, durgam  Svadhā (S), svadhe, svadhāyai, svadhām
Mrtyu and Roga (Sw), mrtyu-rogau, mrtyu-rogābhyām,  mrtyu-rogau
The oceans and rivers (w), sa-samudrā nadyā, sasamudrebhyo nadībhyo, sa-samudrān nadīn  Maruts (Nw), maruto, marudbhyo, maruto  Ganapati (N), ganapate, ganapataye, ganapatim
NEAR THE LOTUS
Prithivi (UNDER THE PETALS OF THE LOTUS), prthivi  prthivyai, prthivīm
Meru (ABOVE THE LoTUS), mero, merave, merum
The deity to be installed (ABOVE MERU), e.g. śrī-vāsudeva,  śrī-vāsudevāya, śrī-vāsudevam
OUTSIDE THE MANDALA
The weapons and vehicles of the guardians of the eight  directions (NEAR THE MANDALA), sāyudhāni vāhanāni,  sāyudhebhyo vāhanebhyo, sāyudhāni vāhanāni
The seven Rsis (FURTHER OUT), saptarsayo, saptarsibhyo,  saptarsīn
The nine planets (FURTHER OUT), nava-grahā, navagrahebhyo, nava-grahān
FURTHEST OUT, THE EIGHT ŚAKTIS
IN THE EIGHT DIRECTIONS
Aindrī (SE), aindri, aindryai, aindrīm  Kaumārī (S), kaumāri, kaumāryai, kaumārīm  Brāhmī (Sw), brāhmi, brāhmyai, brāhmīm  Vārāhī (w), vārāhi, vārāhyai, vārāhīm
Cāmundā (Nw), cāmunde, cāmundāyai, cāmundīm  Vaisnavī (N), vaisnavi, vaisnavyai, vaisnavīm  Maheśvarī (NE), maheśvari, maheśvaryai, maheśvarīm  Vaināyakī (E), vaināyaki, vaināyakyai, vaināyakīm
Before disassembling the Mandala, the divinities present in it  should be asked to depart. After clapping the hands three times,  one should utter the following words while showing the āvāhanamudra: o¥ name of the god in the vocative case) sva-sthānam  gaccha/om bhūr bhuvah svah.
For example: om brahman sva-sthānarh gaccha/o¥ bhūr bhuvah  svah.`Om! Brahmā, please return to your own abode. O¥ bhūr  bhuvah svah: After all the gods have been asked to leave, one after  the other in the same order as they came, the Mandala can be  cleaned away.
GLOSSARY  ACAMANA - a ritual of purification by sipping water  and uttering mantras.
ACYUTA -`The infallible oné, name of Visnu or Krsna.  AGAMAS - a class of scriptures.
AGNIHOTRA - the daily fire sacrifice of brāhmanas.  AKSATA - unhusked barley-corn.
ANANTA -`Unlimited one; name of Visnu or Krsna.  APSARA - a heavenly nymph. . ,
ĀRĀTRIKA - a ceremony of offering things such as incense  and lamps in circles in front of the form of the Lord.  ARGHYA - a ritual gift to the Lord, consisting mainly of a
coconut and a conchshell filled with water.
AŚRAMA - stage of life. Consists of the stage of a brahmacārī,  grhastha, vanaprastha and sannyāsī.
AVATĀRA - divine descent.
BHĀGAVATA - another name for a Vaisnava.
BHĪMA - one of the Pāndavas, heroes of the Mahābhārata.  BHĪMASENA - another name of Bhīma.
BRAHMA - one of the main gods of Hinduism, the creator.  BRAHMACĀRĪ - a celibate student, the first stage of life.  BRAHMAN - God, especially His impersonal aspect.
BRĀHMANA - the priestly or intellectual class of men.  BRAHMA-RĀKSASA - a type of especially malicious ghost.  CAITANYA - Bengali reformer and saint (1486-1534).
Considered a combined avatāra of Rādhā and Krsna by  his followers.
CAKRA - the disk weapon of Visnu.  CANDRA - the moon god.
DAITYA - descendant of Diti, demon.  DANAVA - descendant of Danu, demon.
DAŚAMI - the tenth tithi of the bright and dark fortnight.  Must not be mixed with Ekādaśī.
DAŚARATHA - the father of Rāma.  DEVAKĪ - the mother of Krsna.  DEVĪ - the consort of Śiva.
DHARMA - natural law, proper conduct, duty, religion.  DHARMA-RĀJA -`King of dharma; name of Yama.
DHRUVA - a prince who became a saint and who has his own  Vaikuntha-world.
DHRUVA-LOKA - the pole star, the Vaikuntha-world where  Dhruva dwells.
DOLAYĀTRĀ - the festival of placing the form of Krsna on a  swing.
DURGA - name of Devī.
DVĀDAŚĪ - the twelfth tithi of the bright and dark fortnight.  Day of breaking the fast or sometimes of fasting.  EKĀDAŚĪ - the eleventh tithi of the bright and dark  fortnight. Day of fasting.
GANDHARVAS - a type of heavenly beings.  GARUDA - the golden bird carrier of Visnu.
GAUDĪYA VAISNAVAS - a branch of Vaisnavas who follow  the teachings.of Caitanya.
GAVYA - products of the cow, such as milk.
GAYĀ - a famous city in modern Bihar, place of pilgrimage  and Śrāddha.
GITA - the Bhagavad-gītā, one of the most popular scriptures of Hinduism.
GOPALA -`The cowherd', name of Krsna.
GOPĪCANDANA - a type of yellow clay widely used for tilaka.  GOROCANA - a yellow dye prepared from the bile of cattle.  GOVINDA -`Lord of the cowś, name of Krsna.
GRHASTHA - householder, the second of the four stages of life.  HARI - name of Visnu or Krsna.
I-IEAVaN - a temporary abode of enjoyment, a reward for a  pious life.
HEMĀDRI - authoritative author on dharma, most known  for his work Catur-varga-cintāmani. I3`th century.
HOMA - a sacrifice of ghee and grains into a sacred fire.  ITIHĀSA - the epic scriptures Rāmāyana and Mahābhārata.  INDRA - the king of heaven.
JAGANNĀTHA -`Lord of the universé, name of Visnu or  Krsna.
JAMADAGNI - father of Krsnás descent Paraśurāma.  JANĀRDANA -`Exciter of meń, name of Visnu or Krsna.  JAPA - the silent muttering of mantras.
JAYA -`Conquer!', a joyous exclamation.
KALI - I) a demon, 2) the present, dark age of quarrel with a  Length of 432 00o years.
KALPA - a day of Brahmā, 4 320 000 00O solar years.  KA¥SA - a great demon killed by Krsna.
KAVACA - a protective shield constructed with mantras and  mudrās.
KEŚAVA -`Master of the senses', name of Visnu or Krsna.  KĪRTANA - glorification, generally to sing the glories of God  accompanied by musical instruments and dance.
KRSNA -`The all-attractive oné, the highest God according  to Gaudīya Vaisnavas, origin even of Visnu.
KRSNADEVA - writer on dharma, most known for the work  Prayoga-sāra.
KSATRIYA - the martial or administrative class of men.  KUMBHA - a sacred pot actually consisting of two pots on  top of each others into which the Lord is called for worship.
KU¥KUMA - a red powder used as a cosmetic and in rituals.  KURUKSETRA - a place of pilgrimage in northern modern  Uttar Pradesh and site of the Mahābhārata war.

LAKSMĪ - the goddess of fortune, consort of Visnu.  LIŃGA - the phallic form of Śiva.
MADHU - a great demon killed by Visnu.
MĀDHAVA -`Descendant of the mooń, name of Visnu or  Krsna.
MADHUSŪDANA -`Killer of the Madhu-demon', name of  Visnu or Krsna.
MAHĀDEVĪ -`Great goddess', a name of Devī.  MAHĀ-DVĀDAŚĪ - a special Dvādaśī when fasting is enjoined.  MAHA-PRASADA - the remnants of food that has been  offered to the Lord
MAHEŚVARA -`Great lord', name of Siva.
MANDALA - a sacred geometrical diagram generally drawn  on the floor. Widespread in the tantric tradition.  MANDAPA - a pavillion.
MANTRA - a prayer or an independently powerful word or  phrase.
MANVANTARA - I/14 of a kalpa, or about 308 57I 429 solar  years.
MATHURĀ - city in modern Uttar Pradesh of India where  Krsna was born on earth.
MUDRĀ - a special position of the hands used during  ceremonies.
MUKUNDA - `Giver of liberation; name of Visnu or Krsna.  MUNI - sage.
NĀRADA - sage amongst the gods, son of Brahmā.  NĀRĀYANA -Abode of men', name of Visnu.
NAVAMI - the ninth tithi of the bright and dark fortnight.  NYĀSA -`placing, a generally tantric ritual of spiritualising  the body or an object where the Lord is called to enter by  uttering mantras and touching with the fingers.
om - mystic syllable that begins most mantras. Also called  Pranaya.
PADMANĀBHA -`Lotus-naveled one, name of Visnu.  PAÑCARĀTRAS - type of scripture mainly dealing with  rituals and Vaisnava theology.
PAŚUPĀTAS - type of Saiva scripture.
PRAHLĀDA - king of the demons, but not a demon himself  but a devotee of Visnu.
PRAYĀGA - the confluence of the rivers Gańgā, Yamunā and  (invisible) Sarasvatī. Part of present-day Allahabad.  PURĀNAS - a class of popular religious scriptures dealing for
example with philosophy, ritual and mythology.  RĀDHĀ - the consort of Krsna.
RAMĀ - another name for Laksmī.
RĀMA - an avatāra of Krsna, the hero of the epic Rāmāyana.  RĀMACANDRA - another name for Rāma.
RASA - aesthetic taste or mellow.
RĀSA-DANCE - the mystical circular dance enacted by  Krsna and the cowherdesses in Vrndāvana.  RASĀTALA - a wonderful subterranean world.  RĀSIKA - an expert taster of rasa, connoisseur.  ROOT-MANTRA - a mantra given by the guru.
RSI - seer, wise man.
RUKMANGADA - son of Salya, the king of Madras.
ŚAKTl - I) female divine principle and energy, 2) name of Devī,  3) name of Laksmī.
ŚAIVA - devotee of Siva.
ŚĀLAGRĀMA - ammonite, a special black stone found in the  Gandhakī river basin in Nepal, which often has fossile  marks and which is considered identical with Visnu.
SANDHYA-VANDANA - observance at sunrise, midday and  sunrise by ācamana, worship and japa.
ŚAŃKARA -Auspicious one', name of Śiva.  SANNYĀSĪ - renunciate, the fourth stage of life.  ŚĀSTRA - scripture.
SAURA - devotee of the sun god.
SEEDMANTRA - a mantra consisting of only one mystically  powerful syllable.
SEVEN ISLES - the isles of the world.  SIDDHAS - a class of perfected divine beings.  ŚIVA - one of the main gods of Hinduism.  SMĀRTA - follower of the Smrti. Usually monistic.  SMRTI - class of scriptures dealing with dharma and law.  ŚRADDHA - ritual offering to a departed ancestor.  ŚRAUTA - pertaining to the Śruti.
ŚRĪ - honorific title.
ŚRUTI - the `heard' portion of the Vedic literature,  consisting of the Sa¥hitās, Aranyakas, Brāhmanas and  Upanisads. Considered authoritative by all Hindus.
SUDARŚANA -`Beautiful, the disk weapon of Visnu.  ŚŪDRA - the labourer class of men.
ŚVETADVIPA - `The white isle', a name of heaven.  TILAKA - sectarian mark on the forehead generally made  of clay.
TITHI - lunar day. See appendix I.
TĪRTHA - place of holy bath and pilgrimage.  TRAYODAŚĪ - the thirteenth tithi of the bright and dark  fortnight. Day of breaking the fast when fasting on Dvādaśī.
TRIVIKRAMA -`Three-strider', name of Visnu.  TULASĪ - holy basil (Occimum Sanctum), a shrub dear to  Visnu and sacred to Vaisnavas. Krsna is said not to accept  any food offered without a tulasī leaf.
TWICE-BORN - a member of the three higher castes  (brāhmanas, ksatriyas and vaiśyas), but often simply  another name for a brāhmana.
UMĀ - a name of Devī.
VAIKUNTHA - Visnu's eternal abode.
VAISNAVA - devotee of Visnu or one of His forms such as  Rāma or Krsna.
VAIŚYA - the mercantile or agricultural class of men.  VAJRA - the weapon of Indra, usually concieved of as a  thunderbolt.
VANAPRASTHA - the retired, reclusive stage of life.  VARNA - class of men. The four classes are brāhmana,  ksatriya, vaiśya and śūdra.
VASUS - a class of heavenly beings.
VEDA - basic four scriptures of Hinduism. Also a general  term for all Hindu scripture.
VEDANGA - auxiliary parts of the Uedas, dealing with ritual,  grammar and so on.
VENKATA ĀCĀRYA - original name of Vedānta Deśika, a  very influential Srī Vaisnava theologian. 14th century.  VILĀSA -'manifestation', chapter of the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa.  VISNU - one of the main gods of Hinduism. According to
Gaudīya Vaisnavas, an aspect of Krsna.
VISNUMAYĪ =`The energy of Visnú, a name of Laksmī.  VISNU-SAHASRA-NĀMA - a hymn of the Mahābhārata  containing one thousand names of Visnu.
VOPADEVA - author of many works on dharma, grammar and  other subjects. I3th century.
VRATA - a ritual vow or observance. See introduction.  YAKSAS - a class of semi-divine beings.
YAMA - the god of death. Also known as Yamarāja.  YANTRA - a mystical diagram with mantras, usually  inscribed upon a piece of metal.
YOJANA - a distance of about eleven kilometres.  YUGA - age of the world, with a length of 1 728 000,  I 296 000, 864 000 or 432 00O years.
BIBLIOGRAPHY  I. SOURCES IN SANSKRIT
PURANAS  Agni Mahāpurānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1985.
Bhavisya Mahāpurānam. Vol I-3. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1985.  Brahmā Mahāpurānam. 2nd ed. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1997.  Brahmānda Mahāpurānam. Krsnadāsa Academy,
Varanasi 20OO.
Brahma-vaivarta Purānam. Vol I-2. Motilal Banarsidass,  Delhi 1985.
Brhan-nāradiya Purānam. 2nd ed.Krsnadāsa Academy,  Varanasi 1975.
Devī Bhāgavata Purānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1986.  Garuda Mahāpurānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1984.  Kālikā Purānam. Vol I-3. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1992.  Kūrma Mahāpurānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1983.  Mārkandeya Mahāpurānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1989.  Matsya Mahāpurānam. Vol I-2. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1983.  Nāradiya Mahāpurānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1984.  Padma Mahāpurānam. Vol I-4. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1985.  Saura Purānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1986.
Śiva Mahāpurānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1986.
Skanda Mahāpurānam. Vol I-8. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1985.  Śrīmad Bhāgavatam (Bhāgavata Purāna). Caukhamba  Vidyabhavan> Varanasi 1993.
Varāha Purānam. Vol I-2. Critical edition. All India Kasiraj  Trust, Varanasi 1981.
Vāyu Mahāpurānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1983.  Visnudharmottara Purānam. Nag Publishers, Delhi 1985.
OTHER  AMARASI¥HA: Amarakośa. Ed. Nārāyanarāma ācārya.
Caukhambha Publishers, Varanasi 1998.
BALADEVA VIDYĀBHŪSANA: Srī Brahmasūtragovindabhāsyam. Ed. (with a Hindi translation) Krsnadāsa.  Kuśuma Sarovara Sarimat 2010 (1952).
GOPĀLA BHATTA GOSVĀMĪ: Srī Haribhaktivilāsah. Vol I-3.  Ed. (with a Hindi translation] Śrī Haridāsa Sāstrī. GadādharaGaurahari Press, Vrindavana 1986.
HEMĀDRI: Caturvargacintāmani. Vol I-7. Chaukhambha  Sanskrit Sansthan, Varanasi 1985.
JĪVA GOSVĀMĪ: Srī Bhaktisandarbhah. Ed. (with a Hindi  translation) Śrī Haridāsa Śāstrī. Gadādhara-Gaurahari Press,  Vrindavana 1985.
NARAYANA BHATTA: Sadhanadipika.Ed. (with a Hindi
translation] Krsnadāsa. Kuśuma Sarovara Sa¥vat 2022 (1964).  Rgveda-samhitā. Ed. (with the commentary of Sayanācārya)
F Max Müller. Vol I. Krishnadas Academy, Varanasi 1983.  Suklayajurveda-sa¥hitā. Ed. (with two commentaries and a  Hindi translation] Vāsudeva Laksmana Sāstrī Pansikāra.  Chowkhamba Vidyabhavan, Varanasi 1996.
VEDAVYĀSA: Mahābhārata. Vol I-6. Gita Press,  Gorakhpur Sa¥vat 2053 (1995).
2. SOURCES IN OTHER LANGUAGES
BHAKTIVEDANTA SWAMI PRABHUPADA, A.C.: Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmrta of Krsnadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī.  Madhya Līlā, Vol. I-I7. Bhaktivedānta Book Trust,
Los Angeles 1975.
BON MAHARAJ, TRIDANDI SWAMI BHAKTI HRDAYA: Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmīs Bhakti-rasāmrta-sindhuh. Vol I. Institute  of Oriental Philosophy, Vríndaban 1965.
CAKRAVARTĪ, NARAHARI: Srī Srī Bhaktiratnākara.  Gaudīya Mission, Bagbazar 1987.

CAKRAVARTĪ, VIŚVANĀTHA: The Bhakti Trilogy. Trans.  Sarvabhāvana Dāsa. Rasbihari Lal & Sons, Vrindavan (n.d.J
DE, S.K.: Early History of the Vaisnava Faith and Movement  in Bengal. Firma K.L. Mukhopadhyay, Calcutta 1961.  DUBOIS, ABBE J.A.: Hindu Manners, Customs and
Ceremonies. 3`d ed. Rupa & Co, Calcutta l993.
FREED, STANLEY A. AND FREED, RUTH S.: Hindü Festivals in a
North Indian Village. Anthropological Papers of The  American Museum of Natural History. Nr. 81, l998.
KANE, P.V.: History of Dharmaśāstra. Vol V, part 1. 2nd ed.  Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institite, Poona 1974.  KAPOOR, O.B.L.: The Gosvāmīs of Vrndāvana. Sarasvati
Jayasri Classics, Caracas l995.
ROSEN, STEVEN: The Six Goswamis of Vrindavan.  Folk Books, New York l99l.
SANDAHL-FORGUE, STELLA: Le Gītagovinda.Tradition et  innovation dans le kāvya. Almqvist Fs Wiksell, Stockholm 1977.  VASU, KĀÑCANA: Vaisnava Padāvalī.5th printing.Reflect  Publications, Calcutta i997.
VASU, R.B.S.C: The Vedānta-sūtras of Bādarāyana with the  commentary of Baladeva. (with the Prameya-ratnāval J.  2nd ed. Oriental Books Reprint Corporation, New Delhi 1979.
WEBSON, GUY R. AND YOCUM, GLENN E. (ed): Religious
Festivals in South India and Sri Lanka. Manohar,  New Delhi 1982.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR  Bhrgumuni Dāsa (Máns Broo) was born in Ábo, Finland 1973.  He joined ISKCON in 199a and received initiation from Śrīpād  Suhotra Swami in 1996. Since then, he has been pursuing academic studies at Abo Akademi University (Comparative Religion) and Uppsala University (Indology). He received his MA  in 1999.
He lives with his wife Laura in Helsinki, Finland, where he  is currently working on his Ph.D. about the role of the guru  within the Gaudiya Vaisnava movement. He has been an enthusiastic follower of Ekādaśī for several years, so the present  book has very much been a labour of love.


